King Kong (1933 film)
 
{{Infobox film
| name           = King Kong
| image          = Kingkongposter.jpg
| caption        = Original theatrical poster by Keye Luke
| director       = Merian C. Cooper Ernest B. Schoedsack
| producer       = Merian C. Cooper Ernest B. Schoedsack David O. Selznick  
| screenplay     = James Ashmore Creelman Ruth Rose
| story          = Merian C. Cooper Edgar Wallace Robert Armstrong
| music          = Max Steiner
| cinematography = Eddie Linden J.O. Taylor Vernon Walker
| editing        = Ted Cheesman
| studio         = RKO Radio Pictures
| distributor    = RKO Radio Pictures   Turner Entertainment  
| released       =  
| runtime        = 100 minutes   104 minutes  
| country        = United States
| language       = English
| budget         = $672,000 Richard Jewel, RKO Film Grosses: 1931–1951, Historical Journal of Film Radio and Television, Vol 14 No 1, 1994 p39     ($12 million adjusted for inflation) 
| gross          = $2.8 million    ($51 million adjusted for inflation) 
}} Robert Armstrong, and opened in New York City on March 2, 1933 to rave reviews.

The film tells of a gigantic, prehistoric, island-dwelling ape called   and in King Kong (2005 film)|2005.

==Plot==
In New York Harbor, Carl Denham, a filmmaker famous for shooting animal pictures in remote and exotic locations, charters the ship Venture for his new project, but is unable to secure an actress. Carl searches the streets of New York for a suitable woman. He comes across Ann Darrow and convinces her to join him on the adventure of a lifetime. Despite his ongoing declarations that women have no place onboard ships, the ships first mate, Jack Driscoll becomes attracted to Ann.

After maintaining secrecy for weeks, Denham finally tells Driscoll and Captain Englehorn that theyre searching for an uncharted island shown on a map in Denhams possession. Denham then describes something monstrous connected to the island, a legendary entity known to the islanders only as "Kong." Arriving at the islands shore, they find a native village on a peninsula, cut off from the bulk of the island by an enormous stone wall. A landing party, including the filming crew and Ann, goes ashore and encounters the natives, who propose to trade seven native women for Ann. Denham declines and the landing party cautiously return to the ship.

However, later that night, a contingent of natives capture Ann and take her through the gate in the wall, where, left tied to columns, she is presented to Kong, a giant gorilla. The Venture crew returns to the village and opens the huge gate on the wall; half of the crew then goes after Kong in hopes of rescuing Ann. The crew discovers that, in addition to Kong, other giant creatures inhabit the island. They encounter an enraged Stegosaurus, a lethal Apatosaurus and Kong, who prevents the men from following him across a ravine by shaking them off a fallen log bridge. Only Driscoll and Denham are left alive.

When a Tyrannosaurus attempts to eat Ann, Kong kills it by breaking its jaw and crushing its skull. Driscoll continues to pursue Kong and Ann while Denham returns to the village. While Kong battles a Elasmosaurus and a Pteranodon in his lair, Driscoll manages to reach Ann and escape by climbing down a vine dangling from a cliffs edge. Ann and Driscoll let go before Kong pulls them back up and they fall into and escape via a river below. Kong follows the running couple back to the village where he breaks through the walls huge wooden gate and rampages through the village. Denham knocks the beast out with a gas bomb and decides to take Kong back to New York to show the world.
 It was Beauty killed the Beast."

==Cast==
* Fay Wray as Ann Darrow Robert Armstrong as Carl Denham
* Bruce Cabot as Jack Driscoll
* Frank Reicher as Captain Englehorn
* Noble Johnson as the Native Chief
* Steve Clemente as the Witch Doctor 
* James Flavin as Briggs Victor Wong as Charlie the Cook Sam Hardy as Charles Weston

==Creatures==
 
There are a number of prehistoric creatures appearing in the film. King Kong, one of the last of his kind, is a gigantic ape and the "Eighth Wonder of the World." Kong is   tall and is capable of lifting twice his own weight. He is both worshiped and feared by the natives.

The creatures appearing in the film include Archaeopteryx (seen flying around Skull Island as the Venture crew arrives), Stegosaurus (the ships crew kill it), Apatosaurus (mauls four crew members to death), Dimetrodon (seen climbing up to attack Jack Driscoll), Tyrannosaurus (it attacks Ann but Kong breaks its jaws), Teratornis (seen pecking at the carcass of the Tyrannosaurus), Tanystropheus (tries to strangle Kong, who slams it to the ground and kills it), and Pteranodon (the last major creature on the island that menaces Ann, but it is killed by Kong).

Creatures not appearing in the finished film, but appearing in footage from deleted scenes, include Styracosaurus, Arsinoitherium, a giant spider, a giant crab, a giant tentacled insect, Erythrosuchus, Gigantophis garstini and Triceratops.

==Background==
 
Before King Kong hit the silver screen, a long tradition of jungle films existed, and, whether drama or documentary, such films generally adhered to a narrative pattern that followed an explorer or scientist into the jungle to test a theory only to discover some monstrous aberration in the undergrowth. In such films, scientific knowledge could be turned topsy-turvy at any time and it was this that provided the genre with its vitality, appeal, and endurance. Peary 
 Tarzan of The Lost World made movie history with special effects by Willis OBrien and a crew that later would work on King Kong.  William S. Campbell specialized in monkey-themed films with Monkey Stuff and Jazz Monkey in 1919, with Prohibition Monkey following in 1920. Kong producer Schoedsack had earlier monkey experience directing Chang in 1927 (also with Cooper) and Rango in 1931, both of which prominently featured monkeys in authentic jungle settings. Capitalizing on this trend, "Congo Pictures" released the hoax documentary Ingagi in 1930, advertising the film as "an authentic incontestable celluloid document showing the sacrifice of a living woman to mammoth gorillas." Ingagi was an unabashed black exploitation film, immediately running afoul of the Hollywood code of ethics, as it implicitly depicted black women having sex with gorillas, and baby offspring that looked more ape than human.  The film was an immediate hit, and by some estimates it was one of the highest grossing movies of the 1930s at over $4 million. Although producer Merian C. Cooper never listed Ingagi among his influences for King Kong, its long been held that RKO green-lighted Kong because of the bottom-line example of Ingagi and the formula that "gorillas plus sexy women in peril equals enormous profits". 

==Production==

===Development===

====Concept====
 
 

Coopers fascination with gorillas began with his boyhood reading of Paul Du Chaillus Explorations and Adventures in Equatorial Africa (1861) and was furthered in 1929 by studying a tribe of baboons in Africa while filming The Four Feathers.  After reading W. Douglas Burdens The Dragon Lizards of Komodo, he fashioned a scenario depicting African gorillas battling Komodo dragons intercut with artificial stand-ins for joint shots. He then narrowed the dramatis personae to one ferocious, lizard-battling gorilla (rather than a group) and included a lone woman on expedition to appease those critics who belabored him for neglecting romance in his films. A remote island would be the setting and the gorilla would be dealt a spectacular death in New York City. 
 The Most Dangerous Game, a story about a big game hunter, and hired his friend and former film partner, Ernest Schoedsack, to direct. A huge jungle stage set was built, with Robert Armstrong and Fay Wray as the stars. Once the film was underway, Cooper turned his attention to the studios big-budget-out-of-control fantasy, Creation (1931 film)|Creation, a story about a group of travelers shipwrecked on an island of dinosaurs. The film employed special effects wizard Willis OBrien. 

When Cooper screened OBriens stop-motion Creation footage, he was unimpressed, but realized he could economically make his gorilla picture by scrapping the Komodo dragons and costly location shoots for OBriens animated dinosaurs and the studios existing jungle set. It was at this time Cooper probably cast his gorilla as a giant named Kong, and planned to have him die at the Empire State Building. The RKO board was wary about the project, but gave its approval after Cooper organized a presentation with Wray, Armstrong, and Cabot, and OBriens model dinosaurs. In his executive capacity, Cooper ordered the Creation production shelved, and put its crew to work on Kong. 
 

====Script====
 
 

Cooper assigned recently hired RKO screenwriter and best-selling British mystery/adventure writer Edgar Wallace the job of writing a screenplay and a novel based on his gorilla fantasy. Cooper understood the commercial appeal of Wallaces name and planned to publicize the film as being "based on the novel by Edgar Wallace". Wallace conferred with Cooper and OBrien (who contributed, among other things, the "Anns dress" scene) and began work on January 1, 1932. He completed a rough draft called The Beast on January 5, 1932. Cooper thought the draft needed considerable work but Wallace died on February 10, 1932 just after beginning revisions.  Morton 25–7  Cooper insisted however that Wallace died having written "not one bloody word," and that he gave the writer a screen credit simply because as producer he had promised him one. Goldner (page unknown) 

Cooper called in James A. Creelman (who was working on the script of The Most Dangerous Game at the time) and the two men worked together on several drafts under the title The Eighth Wonder. Some details from Wallaces rough draft were dropped, notably his boatload of escaped convicts. Wallaces Danby Denham character, a big game hunter, became film director Carl Denham. His Shirley became Ann Darrow and her lover-convict John became Jack Driscoll. The beauty and the beast angle was first developed at this time. Kongs escape was switched from Madison Square Garden to Yankee Stadium and (finally) to a Broadway theater. Cute moments involving the gorilla in Wallaces draft were cut because Cooper wanted Kong hard and tough in the belief that his fall would be all the more awesome and tragic. 

Time constraints forced Creelman to temporarily drop The Eighth Wonder and devote his time to the Game script. RKO staff writer Horace McCoy was called in to work with Cooper, and it was he who introduced the island natives, a giant wall, and the sacrificial maidens into the plot. When Creelman returned to the script full-time, he hated McCoys mythic elements, believing the script already had too many over-the-top concepts, but Cooper insisted on keeping them in. RKO head Selznick and his executives wanted Kong introduced earlier in the film (believing the audience would grow bored waiting for his appearance), but Cooper persuaded them that a suspenseful build-up would make Kongs entrance all the more exciting. Morton 28 

Cooper felt Creelmans final draft was slow-paced, too full of flowery dialogue, weighted-down with long scenes of exposition,  and written on a scale that would have been prohibitively expensive to film.  Writer Ruth Rose (Mrs. Ernest Schoedsack) was brought in to clean things up and, although she had never written a screenplay, undertook the task with a complete understanding of Coopers style. She streamlined the script and tightened the action. Rather than explaining how Kong would be transported to New York, for example, she simply cut from the island to the theater. She incorporated autobiographical elements into the script with Cooper mirrored in the Denham character, her husband Schoedsack in the tough but tender Driscoll character, and herself in struggling actress Ann Darrow. She rewrote the dialogue to give it some zip and created the films entire opening chunk showing Denham plucking Ann from the streets of New York. Cooper was delighted with Roses script, approving the newly retitled Kong for production.  Cooper and Schoedsack decided to co-direct scenes but their styles were different (Cooper was slow and meticulous, Schoedsack brisk) and they finally agreed to work separately, with Cooper overseeing OBriens miniature work and directing the special effects sequences, and Schoedsack directing the dialogue scenes. 
 

===Pre-production===

====Casting====

=====Fay Wray=====
  The Wedding The Four The Most Dangerous Game. Morton 31–3 
 Dorothy Jordan, Jean Harlow, and Ginger Rogers were considered, but the role finally went to Wray who wore a blonde wig in the film and was inspired more by Coopers enthusiasm than the script to accept the role. According to her autobiography, On the Other Hand, Wray recounts that Cooper had told her he planned to star her opposite the "tallest, darkest leading man in Hollywood". She assumed he meant Clark Gable until he showed her a picture of Kong climbing the Empire State Building. 

Wray recorded all her screams in one afternoon session during post-production.  On the films 50th anniversary in 1983, one New York theater held a Fay Wray scream-alike contest in its lobby,  and, two days after her death on August 8, 2004, the lights of the Empire State Building were dimmed for 15 minutes in her memory. 

=====Robert Armstrong and Bruce Cabot=====
  Broadway and Robert Armstrong played Wrays alcoholic brother in The Most Dangerous Game and, during filming, became a member of the Cooper-Schoedsack inner circle. He was a shoo-in as Denham when Kong was cast.  The films romantic angle (rather than its jungle or animal angle) was played-up after animal films fared poorly at the box office in the early months of 1933. One exhibitor displayed a promotional still of Wray swooning in Armstrongs arms with the caption, "Their Hearts Stood Still...For There Stood Kong! A Love Story of Today That Spans the Ages!". Although the films romantic subplot belongs to Cabot and Wray, established star Armstrong was chosen for the ad rather than the unknown Cabot.  Months later, Armstrong again played Carl Denham in Kongs sequel, The Son of Kong (1933). 
 stunt double for Joel McCrea) but was convinced otherwise and received the role of Jack Driscoll, his first starring role.  He was an inexperienced actor and described his participation in Kong as standing in the right place, doing what he was told, and collecting a paycheck. 

=====Other players===== Victor Wong Kosciuszko Squadron, played the airplane pilot and Schoedsack the machine gunner in uncredited roles in the films final scenes. 

====Models====
 s at Ueno Zoo displaying prominent belly and buttocks. Kong modelers would streamline the armatures torso to minimize the comical and awkward aspects of the gorillas physique.]]

After the RKO board approved the production of a test reel, Marcel Delgado constructed Kong (or the "Giant Terror Gorilla" as he was then known) per designs and directions from Cooper and OBrien on a one-inch-equals-one-foot scale to simulate a gorilla 18 feet tall. Four models were built: two jointed 18-inch aluminum, foam rubber, latex, and rabbit fur models (to be rotated during filming), one jointed 24-inch model of the same materials for the New York scenes, and a small model of lead and fur for the tumbling-down-the-Empire-State-Building scene. Kongs torso was streamlined to eliminate the comical appearance of the real world gorillas prominent belly and buttocks. His lips, eyebrows, and nose were fashioned of rubber, his eyes of glass, and his facial expressions controlled by thin, bendable wires threaded through holes drilled in his aluminum skull. During filming, Kongs rubber skin dried out quickly under studio lights, making it necessary to replace it often and completely rebuild his facial features. 
 Curtiss Helldiver on top of the Empire State Building]]
A huge bust of Kongs head, neck, and upper chest was made of wood, cloth, rubber, and bearskin by Delgado, E. B. Gibson, and Fred Reefe. Inside the structure, metal levers, hinges, and an air compressor were operated by three men to control the mouth and facial expressions. Its fangs were 10 inches in length and its eyeballs 12 inches in diameter. The bust was moved from set to set on a flatcar. Its scale matched none of the models and, if fully realized, Kong would have stood thirty to forty feet tall. 

Two versions of Kongs right hand and arm were constructed of steel, sponge rubber, rubber, and bearskin. The first hand was nonarticulated, mounted on a crane, and operated by grips for the scene in which Kong grabs at Driscoll in the cave. The other hand and arm had articulated fingers, was mounted on a lever to elevate it, and was used in the several scenes in which Kong grasps Ann. A nonarticulated leg was created of materials similar to the hands, mounted on a crane, and used to stomp on Kongs victims. 

 s  
The dinosaurs were made by Delgado in the same fashion as Kong and based on Charles R. Knights murals in the American Museum of Natural History in New York City. All the armatures were manufacted in the RKO machine shop. Materials used were cotton, foam rubber, latex sheeting, and liquid latex. Football bladders were placed inside some models to simulate breathing. A scale of one-inch-equals-one-foot was employed and models ranged from 18 inches to 3 feet in length. Several of the models were originally built for Creation and sometimes two or three models were built of individual species. Prolonged exposure to studio lights wreaked havoc with the latex skin so John Cerasoli carved wooden duplicates of each model to be used as stand-ins for test shoots and lineups. He carved wooden models of Ann, Driscoll, and other human characters. Models of the Venture, subway cars, and war planes were built. 

====Live-action scenes====
King Kong was filmed in several stages over an eight-month period. Some actors had so much time between their Kong periods, they worked other films. Cabot completed Road House and Wray appeared in the horror films Doctor X (film)|Dr. X and Mystery of the Wax Museum. She estimated she worked ten weeks on Kong over its eight-month production.

In May–June 1932, Cooper directed the first live-action Kong scenes on the jungle set built for The Most Dangerous Game. Some of these scenes were incorporated into the test reel later exhibited for the RKO board. The script was still in revision when the jungle scenes were shot and much of the dialogue was improvised. The jungle set was scheduled to be struck after Game was completed so Cooper filmed all the other jungle scenes at this time. The last scene shot was that of Driscoll and Ann racing through the jungle to safety following their escape from Kongs lair.
 Curtiss F8C-5/O2C-1 Helldiver war planes taking off and in flight were filmed at a U.S. Naval airfield on Long Island. Views of New York City were filmed from the Empire State Building for backgrounds in the final scenes and architectural plans for the mooring mast were secured from the buildings owners for a mock-up to be constructed on the Hollywood soundstage. 

  Bird of The King of Kings (1927) and dressed up with massive gates, a gong, and primitive carvings. The scene of Ann being led through the gates to the sacrificial altar was filmed at night with hundreds of extras and 350 lights for illumination. A camera was mounted on a crane to follow Ann to the altar. The Culver City Fire Department was on hand to do their job should the set go up in flames from the many native torches used in the scene. The wall and gate were destroyed in 1939 for Gone With the Winds sequence of the burning of Atlanta. Kongs rampage through the village was filmed (again, with hundreds of extras) and filming was completed with individual vignettes of mayhem and native panic.

Meanwhile, the scene depicting a New York woman being dropped to her apparent death from a hotel window was filmed on the soundstage using the articulated hand. At the same time, a scene depicting poker players surprised by Kongs face peering through a window was filmed using the big head; the scene was eventually dropped.  When filming was completed, a break was scheduled to finish the interior sets and to allow screenwriter Ruth Rose time to finish the script.

In September–October 1932, Schoedsack returned to the soundstage after completing the native village shoots in Culver City. The decks and cabins of the Venture were constructed and all the live-action shipboard scenes were then filmed. The New York scenes were filmed, including the scene of Ann being plucked from the streets by Denham and the diner scene. Following the interior scenes, Schoedsack returned to San Pedro and spent a day on a tramp steamer to film the Driscoll-slugs-Ann scene and various harbor atmosphere scenes. The Shrine Auditorium in Los Angeles was rented for one day to film the on-stage scenes with Kong in chains and the backstage theater scenes following his escape. Goldner 159  Principal photography wrapped at the end of October 1932 with the Driscoll-rescues-Ann scene at the top of the Empire State Building. Schoedsacks work was completed and he headed to Syria to film outdoor scenes for Arabia, a project that was never completed. 

In December 1932 – January 1933, the actors were called back to film the optical effects shots which were mostly rear-screen projections. Technical problems inherent in the process made filming difficult and time-consuming. Wray spent most of a twenty-two-hour period sitting in a fake tree to witness the battle between Kong and a Tyrannosaurus rex|T. rex. She was sore for days after. Many of the scenes featuring Wray in the articulated hand were filmed at this time. In December, Cooper reshot the New York woman falling to her death scene. Stunt doubles were filmed for the water scenes depicting Driscoll and Ann escaping from Kong. A portion of the jungle set was reconstructed to film Denham snagging his sleeve on a branch during the pursuit scene. Originally, Denham ducked behind a bush to escape danger but this was later considered cowardly and the scene reshot. The final scene was originally staged on the top of the Empire State Building, but Cooper was dissatisfied and reshot the scene with Kong lying dead in the street and a crowd gathered about him.

===Post-production===

King Kong was settled upon as the title, and the film cut from 125 to 100 minutes, with scenes that slowed the pace or diverted attention from Kong deleted. Probably the most infamous deleted scene was what later became known as the "Spider Pit Sequence", where a number of sailors from the Venture survived a fall into a ravine, only to be eaten alive by various large spiders, insects and other creatures. In a studio memo, Merian C. Cooper said that he cut the scene out himself because it "stopped the story". Aside from some still photographs and pre-production artwork, no trace of it has ever been found. Peter Jackson later did a reimagining of this scene for his King Kong movie, and he also shot another version of the scene for fun using stop-motion animation, which was included among the bonus features of the two-disc DVD of the 1933 original. 

Kongs roars and grunts were created by manipulating the recorded roars of zoo lions. For budget reasons, RKO decided not to have an original film score composed but directed composer Max Steiner to simply reuse music from other films. Cooper thought the film deserved an original score and paid Steiner $50,000 to compose it. Steiner completed the score in six weeks and recorded it with a 46-piece orchestra. The studio later reimbursed Cooper.  The score was unlike any that came before and marked a significant change in the history of film music. King Kongs score was the first feature-length musical score written for an American "talkie" film, the first major Hollywood film to have a thematic score rather than background music, the use of a 46-piece orchestra, and recording on three separate tracks (sound effects, dialogue, and music). Steiner used a number of new film scoring techniques, such as drawing upon opera conventions for his use of leitmotifs.   

==Releases==

===Premieres===
  in Los Angeles on March 23, 1933. Kongs big head bust was placed in the theaters forecourt, and the screening preceded by a seventeen-act stage show featuring (among other things) The Dance of the Sacred Ape performed by a troupe of African American dancers.]]

King Kong opened at the 6,200-seat Radio City Music Hall in New York City and the 3,700-seat RKO Roxy across the street on Thursday, March 2, 1933. The film was preceded by a stage show called Jungle Rhythms. Crowds lined up around the block on opening day, tickets were priced at $.35 to $.75, and, in its first four days, every one of its ten-shows-a-day were sold out&nbsp;– setting an all-time attendance record for an indoor event. Over the four-day period, the film grossed $89,931. Morton 78 

The film had its official world premiere on March 23, 1933 at Graumans Chinese Theater in Hollywood. The big head bust was placed in the theaters forecourt and a seventeen-act show preceded the film with The Dance of the Sacred Ape performed by a troupe of African American dancers the highpoint. Kong cast and crew attended and Wray thought her on-screen screams distracting and excessive. The film opened nationwide on April 10, 1933, and worldwide on Easter Day in London, England|London, England. 

===Reception=== John Mosher of The New Yorker called it "ridiculous", but wrote that there were "many scenes in this picture that are certainly diverting".  The New York World-Telegram said it was "one of the very best of all the screen thrillers, done with all the cinemas slickest camera tricks".  The Chicago Tribune called it "one of the most original, thrilling and mammoth novelties to emerge from a movie studio." 

In 2002, Roger Ebert wrote that the effects are not up to modern standards, but the film remains one "that still somehow works."  As of 2012, King Kong holds an average score of 100% "Certified Fresh" based on 52 reviews on Rotten Tomatoes. 

===Box office===
The film was a box office success making about $2 million in rentals on its initial release, with an opening weekend estimated at $90,000. During the films first run it made a profit of $650,000.  It was re-released in 1938, 1942, 1946,1952, and 1956. After the 1952 re-release, Variety estimated the film had made $4 million in cumulative domestic rentals for that year. 

===Awards and honors===
Kong did not receive any Academy Awards nominations. Selznick wanted to nominate OBrien and his crew for a special award in visual effects but the Academy declined. Such a category did not exist at the time and would not exist until 1938. Sidney Saunders and Fred Jackman received a special achievement award for the development of the translucent acetate/cellulose rear screen&nbsp;– the only Kong-related award. 

The film has since received some significant honors. In 1975, Kong was named one of the 50 best American films by the American Film Institute, and, in 1991, the film was deemed "culturally, historically and aesthetically significant" by the Library of Congress and selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry. In 1998, the AFI ranked the film #43 on its list of the 100 greatest movies of all time. 

American Film Institute Lists
* AFIs 100 Years...100 Movies – #43
* AFIs 100 Years...100 Thrills – #12
* AFIs 100 Years...100 Passions – #24
* AFIs 100 Years...100 Heroes and Villains:
** Kong&nbsp;– Nominated Villain
* AFIs 100 Years...100 Movie Quotes:
** "Oh, no, it wasnt the airplanes. It was Beauty killed the Beast." – #84
* AFIs 100 Years of Film Scores – #13
* AFIs 100 Years...100 Movies (10th Anniversary Edition) – #41
* AFIs 10 Top 10 – #4 Fantasy film

===Re-releases, censorship and restorations===
 Stricter decency rules had been put into effect in Hollywood since its 1933 premiere and each time it was censored further, with several scenes being either trimmed or excised altogether.

These scenes were: Morton 83–4 
 
* An Apatosaurus mauling crewmen in the water, chasing one up a tree and killing him;
* Kong undressing Ann Darrow and sniffing his fingers;
* Kong biting and stepping on natives when he attacks the village;
* Kong biting a reporter in New York;
* Kong mistaking a sleeping woman for Ann and dropping her to her death after realizing his mistake. After the 1956 re-release, the film was sold to television (first being broadcast March 5, 1956). 

In 1969, a 16mm print, including the censored footage, was found in Philadelphia. The cut scenes were added to the film, restoring it to its original theatrical running time of 100 minutes. This version was re-released to art houses by Janus Films in 1970. 

Over the next two decades, Universal Studios carried out further photochemical restoration on King Kong. This was based on a 1942 release print, with missing censor cuts taken from a 1937 print, which "contained heavy vertical scratches from projection." 

After a 6-year worldwide search for the best surviving materials, a further, fully digital, restoration utilizing   added, bringing the overall running time to 104 minutes.
 colorized in the late 1980s for television. 

===Home media=== very first movie to have an audio commentary track included.

King Kong had numerous VHS releases of varying quality prior to receiving an official studio release. Those included a 60th anniversary edition in 1993 from Turner Home Entertainment, featuring a front cover which, upon depressing his chest, had the sound effect of Kong roaring. It also included the colorized version of the film and a new 25-minute documentary, It Was Beauty Killed the Beast. The documentary is also available on two different UK King Kong DVDs.

In the US, a 2-disc, Special Edition DVD containing the full-digital restoration of King Kong and numerous extra features, was released in 2005 (2006 in Australia and New Zealand), to coincide with the theatrical release of Peter Jacksons King Kong (2005 film)|remake. A Blu-ray Disc version of the Special Edition was released in the US in 2010. 

Warner Bros. hold exclusive worldwide rights to their restoration. At present, all other, non-Warner, worldwide DVD releases contain only Universals earlier, 100 minute, pre-2005 restoration. 

The 1980s colorized version is available on DVD in the UK and Italy. 

==Possible prequel==
 Universal Pictures/Legendary Pictures co-production prequel is set to be released on March 10, 2017 and to feature a "new, distinct timeline."  The studio announced during the previous October that the intention is for Tom Hiddleston to star as the lead and it will be directed by Jordan Vogt-Roberts with the screenplay to be written by Max Borenstein    and John Gatins. 

==See also==
* The Son of Kong (1933) – sequel to the original film King Kong (1976) King Kong (2005)
* List of giant monster films
* List of stop-motion films
* Skull Island Mighty Joe Young (1949) The Lost World (1925)
* Ingagi (1930)

==References==
;notes
 

;Bibliography
*  
*  
*  
*  
*  
*  
*  
*  
*  
*  
*  
*  
*  
*  
*  
*  

==External links==
 
*  
*  
*  
*  

 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 