Monty Python's Life of Brian
 Life of Brian (Family Guy)}}
 
 
{{Infobox film
| name            = Monty Pythons Life of Brian
| image           = Lifeofbrianfilmposter.jpg
| alt             = 
| caption         = Theatrical release poster
| director        = Terry Jones
| producer        = John Goldstone
| writer          = Graham Chapman John Cleese Terry Gilliam Eric Idle Terry Jones Michael Palin
| starring        = Graham Chapman John Cleese Terry Gilliam Eric Idle Terry Jones Michael Palin
| music           = Geoffrey Burgon
| cinematography  = Peter Biziou Julian Doyle Python (Monty) Pictures
| distributor     = Orion Pictures Warner Bros.
| released        =  
| runtime         = 93 minutes  
| country         = United Kingdom
| language        = English
| budget          = $4 million 
| gross           = $20 million 
}}

Monty Pythons Life of Brian, also known as Life of Brian, is a 1979 British comedy film starring and written by the comedy group Monty Python (Graham Chapman, John Cleese, Terry Gilliam, Eric Idle, Terry Jones and Michael Palin), and directed by Jones. It tells the story of Brian Cohen (played by Chapman), a young Jewish man who is born on the same day as, and next door to, Jesus Christ and is subsequently mistaken for the Messiah.
 Beatle George Harrison arranged the finance for Life of Brian, through the formation of his company HandMade Films.
 Ireland and Norway, banned its showing, with a few of these bans lasting decades. The filmmakers used such notoriety to benefit their marketing campaign, with posters in Sweden reading So funny, it was banned in Norway!

The film was a box-office success, grossing fourth-highest of any film in the United Kingdom in 1979 and highest of any British film in the United States that year. It has remained popular since then, receiving positive reviews. The film received a 96% Fresh rating on Rotten Tomatoes with the consensus One of the more cutting-edge films of the 1970s, this religious farce from the classic comedy troupe is as poignant as it is funny and satirical,  and it was named "greatest comedy film of all time" by several magazines and television networks.

==Plot== three wise Roman occupation of Judea. While attending Jesus Sermon on the Mount, Brian becomes infatuated with an attractive young rebel, Judith. His desire for her and hatred for the Romans lead him to join the Peoples Front of Judea (PFJ), one of many fractious and bickering independence movements, who spend more time fighting each other than the Romans.

After several misadventures, and escaping from Pontius Pilate, the fugitive winds up in a line-up of would-be mystics and prophets who harangue the passing crowd in a plaza. Forced to come up with something plausible in order to blend in and keep the guards off his back, Brian babbles pseudo-religious truisms, and quickly attracts a small but intrigued audience. Once the guards have left, Brian tries to put the episode behind him, but he has unintentionally inspired a movement. He grows frantic when he finds that some people have started to follow him around, with even the slightest unusual occurrence being hailed as a "miracle". After slipping away from the mob, Brian runs into Judith, and they spend the night together. In the morning, Brian opens the curtains to discover an enormous crowd of people outside his mothers house, all proclaiming him to be the Messiah. Brians mother protests: "Hes not the Messiah, hes a very naughty boy." Brian finds himself unable to change their minds, because his every word and action are immediately seized as points of doctrine.
 miracle cures. speech impediment. Eventually, Judith appears in the crowd and calls for the release of Brian, which the crowd echoes, since the name contains the letter "r". Pilate then agrees to "welease Bwian".

The order from Pilate is eventually relayed to the guards, but in a moment parodying the climax of the film Spartacus (film)|Spartacus, various crucified people all claim to be "Brian of Nazareth" (one man shouting "Im Brian and sos my wife") and the wrong man is released. Various other opportunities for a reprieve for Brian are denied as, one by one, his "allies" (including Judith and his mother) step forward to explain why they are leaving the "noble freedom fighter" hanging in the hot sun. Hope is renewed when a crack suicide squad from the Judean Peoples Front (not to be confused with the PFJ) come charging towards the Romans, but rather than fighting to release Brian or the other prisoners, they commit mass suicide as a political protest. Condemned to a long and painful death, Brian finds his spirits lifted by his fellow sufferers, who break into song with "Always Look on the Bright Side of Life." 

==Cast==
A list of all the characters given actual names in the script, or with a spoken role. All names and character descriptions are taken from the published script.  Each Python (especially Terry Gilliam) also played various bystanders and hangers-on. The Pythons themselves are listed first (in alphabetical order) followed by the rest of the cast in order of appearance.
 

* Graham Chapman – Brian, Biggus Dickus, 2nd wise man
* John Cleese – Reg, High priest, Centurion of the Yard, Deadly Dirk, Arthur, 1st wise man
* Terry Gilliam – Another person further forward (at Mount – "Do you hear that? Blessed are the Greek!"), Blood and Thunder prophet, Geoffrey, Gaoler, Frank
* Eric Idle – Mr Cheeky, Stan/Loretta, Harry the Haggler, Culprit woman who casts first stone, Intensely dull youth, Otto, Gaolers assistant, Mr Frisbee III
* Terry Jones – Brian Cohens mother (Mandy), Colin, Simon the Holy Man, Saintly passer-by
* Michael Palin – Mr Big-Nose, Francis, Mrs A, Ex-leper, Ben, Pontius Pilate, Boring Prophet, Eddie, Nisus Wettus, 3rd wise man
* Kenneth Colley – Jesus Christ
* Neil Innes – A weedy Samaritan
* Gwen Taylor – Mrs Big-Nose, Woman with sick donkey, young girl
* Terence Bayler – Gregory, Dennis
* Carol Cleveland – Mrs Gregory, Elsie
* Charles McKeown – Man further forward (at Mount), Stig, Blind Man, False Prophet, Giggling Guard
* Chris Langham - Alfonso, Giggling guard
* Sue Jones-Davies – Judith Iscariot John Young – Matthias Bernard McKenna – Stoners Helper, Parvus
* Spike Milligan – Spike
* George Harrison (uncredited) – Mr Papadopoulos

Several characters remained unnamed during the film but do have names that are used in the soundtrack album track listing and elsewhere. There is no mention in the film of the fact that Eric Idles ever-cheerful joker is called Mr Cheeky, or that the Roman guard played by Michael Palin is named Nisus Wettus.
 World War II battlefields in Tunisia where the film was being made. The Pythons were alerted to this one morning and he was promptly included in the scene that just happened to be being filmed. He disappeared again in the afternoon before he could be included in any of the close-up or publicity shots for the film. 

==Production==
  (right)]] New Testament era in the same way Holy Grail had lampooned Arthurian legend. All they needed was an idea for a plot. Eric Idle and Terry Gilliam, while promoting Holy Grail in Amsterdam, had come up with a sketch in which Jesus cross was falling apart because of the idiotic carpenters who built it and he angrily tells them how to do it correctly. However, after an early brainstorming stage, and despite being non-believers, they agreed that Jesus was "definitely a good guy" and found nothing to mock in his actual teachings: "Hes not particularly funny, what hes saying isnt mockable, its very decent stuff..." said Idle later.    After settling on the name Brian for their new protagonist, one idea considered was that of "the 13th disciple".  The focus eventually shifted to a separate individual born at a similar time and location, who would be mistaken for the Messiah, but had no desire to be followed as such.

Writing began in December 1976, with a first draft completed by mid-1977. The final pre-production draft was ready in January 1978, following "a concentrated two-week writing and water-skiing period in Barbados".    The film would not have been made without former Beatle and Python fan George Harrison, who set up HandMade Films to help fund it at a cost of £3&nbsp;million. Harrison put up the money for it as he "wanted to see the movie" (this was later described by Terry Jones as the "worlds most expensive cinema ticket" ). The original backers, EMI Films, had been scared off at the last minute by the subject matter, particularly Bernard Delfont.  As a result, the very last words in the film are: "I said to him, Bernie, theyll never make their money back on this one", teasing Delfont for his lack of faith in the project. Terry Gilliam later said, "They pulled out on the Thursday. The crew was supposed to be leaving on the Saturday. Disastrous. It was because they read the script... finally." 
   As a reward for his help, Harrison appears in a cameo appearance as Mr. Papadopoulos, "owner of the Mount", who briefly shakes hands with Brian in a crowd scene (this happens at 1h09min of the film). His one word of dialogue (a cheery Scouse, but out-of-place-in-Judea, "ullo") had to be dubbed in later.
 their structural matte paintings, useful in particular for the very first shot of the three wise men against a starscape and in giving the illusion of the whole of the outside of the fortress being covered in graffiti. Perhaps the most significant contribution from Gilliam was the scene where Brian accidentally leaps off a high building and inadvertently lands inside a starship about to engage in an interstellar war. This was done "in camera" using a hand-built model starship and miniature pyrotechnics; clearly this was influenced by Star Wars. Afterwards, George Lucas met Terry Gilliam in San Francisco and praised Gilliam for his work.

The film was shot on location in   (1 January 2007). The Secret Life of Brian.  Following shooting between 16 September and 12 November 1978,  a two-hour-long rough cut of the film was put together for its first private showing in January 1979. Over the next few months Life of Brian was re-edited and re-screened a number of times for different preview audiences before the final cut was complete, losing a number of entire filmed sequences (see #Lost scenes|§ Lost scenes below). 

==Religious satire and blasphemy accusations== Richard Webster Harrogate council, one of those that banned the film, revealed during a television interview that the council had not seen the film, and had based their opinion on what they had been told by the Nationwide Festival of Light, a grouping with an evangelical Christian base, of which they knew nothing. 

Some bans continued into the 21st century. In 2008, Torbay Council finally permitted the film to be shown after it won an online vote for the English Riviera International Comedy Film Festival.    In 2009, it was announced that a thirty-year-old ban of the film in the Welsh town of Aberystwyth had finally been lifted, and the subsequent showing was attended by Terry Jones and Michael Palin alongside mayor Sue Jones-Davies (who portrayed Judith Iscariot in the film).   However, before the showing, an Aberystwyth University student discovered that the film had never been banned in Aberystwyth, but had been shown (or scheduled to be shown) at a cinema in the town in 1981.   In 2013, a German official in the state of North Rhine-Westphalia considered the film to be possibly offensive to Christians and hence subject to a local regulation prohibiting its public screening on Good Friday, despite protests by local atheists.  
 picketed by both rabbis and nuns ("Nuns with banners!" observed Michael Palin).  It was also banned for eight years in Ireland and for a year in Norway (it was marketed in Sweden as "The film so funny that it was banned in Norway").    During the films theatrical run in Finland, a text explaining that the film was a parody of Hollywood historical epics was added to the opening credits. 

  boosted publicity.  Leaflets arguing against the films representation of the New Testament (for example, suggesting that the Wise Men would not have approached the wrong stable as they do in the opening of the film) were documented in Robert Hewisons book Monty Python: The Case Against.

One of the most controversial scenes was the films ending: Brians   that they worship seems to me a pretty sick sort of religion quite honestly".  Religious figures later responded by saying that Jones did not seem to understand the meaning of the crucifix symbol or its significance to Christians as a reminder of the suffering and death Christ endured for their sake. The Pythons also argued that crucifixion was a standard form of execution in ancient times and not just one especially reserved for Jesus. 

The Pythons often prided themselves on the depths of the historical research they had taken before writing the script. They all believe that, as a consequence, the film portrays 1st century Judea more accurately than actual Biblical epics, with its focus centred more on the average person of the era.
 BBC2 discussion Bishop of establishment figures engaged in cheap jibes and point scoring. They also expressed disappointment in Muggeridge, whom all in Python had previously respected as a satirist. Cleese expressed that his reputation had "plummeted" in his eyes, while Palin commented that, "He was just being Muggeridge, preferring to have a very strong contrary opinion as opposed to none at all".  Muggeridges verdict on the film was that it was "Such a tenth-rate film that it couldnt possibly destroy anyones genuine faith".
 DVD audio heretical because lampoons the aura around him. The comedy begins when members of the crowd mishear his statements of peace, love and tolerance ("I think he said, blessed are the cheese makers"). Importantly, he is distinct from the character of Brian, which is also evident in the scene where an annoying and ungrateful ex-leper pesters Brian for money, while moaning that since Jesus cured him, he has lost his source of income in the begging trade (referring to Jesus as a "bloody do-gooder").
 historical figure single mother. 

Not all the Pythons agree on the definition of the movies tone. There was a brief exchange that occurred when the surviving members reunited in Aspen, Colorado, in 1998. In the section where Life of Brian is being discussed, Terry Jones says, "I think the film is heretical, but it’s not blasphemous". Eric Idle can be heard to concur, adding, "It’s a heresy". However, John Cleese, disagreeing, counters, "I don’t think it’s a heresy. Its making fun of the way that people misunderstand the teaching". Jones responds, "Of course its a heresy, John! Its attacking the Church! And that has to be heretical". Cleese replies, "No, its not attacking the Church, necessarily. Its about people who cannot agree with each other".

In a later interview, Jones said the film "isnt blasphemous because it doesn’t touch on belief at all. It is heretical, because it touches on dogma and the interpretation of belief, rather than belief itself." 
 Christian Voice, Stephen Green, the head of Christian Voice, insisted that "You dont promote Christ to the community by taking the mick out of him". The Reverend Jonathan Adams, one of the churchs clergy, defended his taste in comedy, saying that it did not mock Jesus, and that it raised important issues about the hypocrisy and stupidity that can affect religion.  Again on the films DVD commentary, Cleese also spoke up for religious people who have come forward and congratulated him and his colleagues on the films highlighting of double standards among purported followers of their own faith. 

==Political satire== British left-wing Roman occupation of Judea, but fall into the familiar pattern of intense competition among factions that appears, to an outsider, to be over ideological distinctions so small as to be invisible; "ideological purity", as Cleese once described it. Michael Palin says that the various separatist movements were modelled on "modern resistance groups, all with obscure acronyms which they can never remember and their conflicting agendas". 
 Trotskyist factions). The infighting among revolutionary organisations is demonstrated most dramatically when the PFJ attempts to kidnap Pontius Pilates wife, but encounters agents of the Campaign for a Free Galilee, and the two factions begin a violent brawl over which of them conceived of the plan first. When Brian exhorts them to cease their fighting to struggle "against the common enemy," the revolutionaries stop and cry in unison, "the Judean Peoples Front!" However, they soon resume their fighting and, with two Roman legionnaires watching bemusedly, continue until Brian is left the only survivor, at which point he is captured.
 shop stewards". 

==Lost scenes==
A number of scenes were cut during the editing process. Five deleted scenes, a total of 13 minutes, including the controversial "Otto", were first made available in 1997 on the Criterion Collection Laserdisc.  An unknown amount of raw footage was destroyed in 1998 by the company that bought Handmade Films. However, a number of them (of varying quality) were shown the following year on the Paramount Comedy Channel in the UK; it has not been disclosed how these scenes were saved or where they came from; possibly the source was the Criterion laserdisc. 
The scenes shown included three shepherds discussing sheep and completely missing the arrival of the angel heralding Jesuss birth, which would have been at the very start of the film; a segment showing the attempted kidnap of Pilates wife (a large woman played by John Case) whose escape results in a fistfight; a scene introducing hardline Zionist Otto, leader of the Judean Peoples Front (played by Eric Idle) and his men who practice a suicide run in the courtyard; and a brief scene in which Judith releases some birds into the air in an attempt to summon help. The shepherds scene has badly distorted sound, and the kidnap scene has poor colour quality.    The same scenes that were on the Criterion laserdisc can now be found on the Criterion Collection DVD.
 Imperial German helmets. The official reason for the cutting was that Ottos dialogue slowed down the narrative. However, Gilliam, writing in The Pythons Autobiography by The Pythons, said he thought it should have stayed, saying "Listen, weve alienated the Christians, lets get the Jews now". Idle himself was said to have been uncomfortable with the character; "Its essentially a pretty savage attack on rabid Zionism, suggesting its rather akin to Nazism, which is a bit strong to take, but certainly a point of view".  Michael Palins personal journal entries from the period when various edits of Brian were being test-screened consistently reference the Pythons and filmmakers concerns that the Otto scenes were slowing the story down and thus were top of the list to be chopped from the final cut of the film.  However, Oxford Brookes University historian David Nash says the removal of the scene represented "a form of self-censorship" and the Otto sequence "which involved a character representative of extreme forms of Zionism" was cut "in the interests of smoothing the way for the films distribution in America." 
 continuity reasons, as their dead bodies were very prominently placed throughout the rest of the scene. He acknowledged that some of the humour of this sole remaining contribution was lost through the earlier edits, but felt they were necessary to the overall pacing.
 Fifth Legion to the headquarters of the Peoples Front of Judea, Reg (John Cleese) says "You cunt!! You stupid, bird-brained, flat-headed..."  The profanity was overdubbed to "you klutz" before the film was released. Cleese approved of this editing as he felt the reaction to the four-letter word would "get in the way of the comedy". 

An early listing of the sequence of sketches reprinted in Monty Python: The Case Against by Robert Hewison reveals that the film was to have begun with a set of sketches at an English public school. Much of this material was first printed in the "MONTYPYTHONSCRAPBOOK" that accompanied the original script publication of The Life of Brian and then subsequently reused. The song "All Things Dull and Ugly" and the parody scripture reading "Martyrdom of St. Victor" were performed on Monty Pythons Contractual Obligation Album (1980). The idea of a violent rugby match between school masters and small boys was filmed in Monty Pythons The Meaning of Life (1983). A sketch about a boy who dies at school appeared on the unreleased The Hastily Cobbled Together for a Fast Buck Album (1981).

==Box office==
For the original British and Australian releases, a spoof travelogue narrated by John Cleese, Away From It All, was shown before the film itself. It consisted mostly of stock travelogue footage and featured arch comments from Cleese. For instance, a shot of Bulgarian girls in ceremonial dresses was accompanied by the comment "Hard to believe, isnt it, that these simple happy folk are dedicated to the destruction of Western Civilisation as we know it!", Communist Bulgaria being a member of the Warsaw Pact at the time. Not only was this a spoof of travelogues per se, it was a protest against the then common practice in Britain of showing cheaply made banal short features before a main feature.

Life of Brian opened on 17 August 1979 in five North American theatres and grossed US$140,034 ($28,007 per screen) in its opening weekend. Its total gross was $19,398,164. It was the highest grossing British film in North America that year. Released on 8 November 1979 in the UK,  the film was the fourth highest grossing film in Britain in 1979.

On 30 April 2004, Life of Brian was re-released on five North American screens to "cash in" (as Terry Jones put it)  on the box office success of Mel Gibsons The Passion of the Christ. It grossed $26,376 ($5,275 per screen) in its opening weekend. It ran until October 2004, playing at 28 screens at its widest point, eventually grossing $646,124 during its re-release. By comparison, a re-release of Monty Python and the Holy Grail had earned $1.8 million three years earlier. A DVD of the film was also released that year.

==Album==
 
An album was also released by Monty Python in 1979 in conjunction with the film. In addition to the "Brian Song"  and "Always Look on the Bright Side of Life", it contains scenes from the film with brief linking sections performed by Eric Idle and Graham Chapman. The album opens with a brief rendition of "Hava Nagila" on Scottish bagpipes. A CD version was released in 1997.

==Legacy==
Life of Brian has regularly been cited as a significant contender for the title "greatest comedy film of all time", and has been named as such in polls conducted by Total Film magazine in 2000,    the British TV network Channel 4 in 2006  and The Guardian newspaper in 2007.  Rotten Tomatoes lists it as one of the best reviewed comedies, with a 96% approval rating from 44 published reviews. A 2011 poll by Time Out magazine ranked it as the third greatest comedy film ever made,  behind Airplane! and This is Spinal Tap.
 BFI declared Life of Brian to be the 28th best British film of all time, in their equivalent of the American Film Institute|AFIs original 100 Years...100 Movies list. It was the seventh highest ranking comedy on this list (four of the better placed efforts were classic Ealing Films).  Another Channel 4 poll in 2001 named it the 23rd greatest film of all time (the only comedy that came higher on this occasion was Billy Wilders Some Like It Hot, which was ranked 5th). 

The line, "Hes not the Messiah, hes a very naughty boy!", spoken by Brians mother Mandy to the crowd assembled outside her house, has been voted by readers of BOL.com the funniest line in film history. 
This poll also featured two of the films other famous lines ("What have the Romans ever done for us?" and "Im Brian and sos my wife") in the top 10.

===Spin-offs===
Spin-offs include a script-book The Life of Brian of Nazareth, which was printed back-to-back with MONTYPYTHONSCRAPBOOK as a single book. The printing of this book also caused problems, due to rarely used laws in the United Kingdom against blasphemy, dictating what can and cannot be written about religion. The publisher refused to print both halves of the book, and original prints were by two companies. 
 Monty Pythons football fans. HMS Sheffield, severely damaged in an Argentinean Exocet missile attack on 4 May, started singing it while awaiting rescue.   2000 Olympic 2012 Olympic closing ceremony. "Always Look on the Bright Side of Life" is also featured in Eric Idles Spamalot, a Broadway musical based upon Monty Python and the Holy Grail, and was sung by the rest of the Monty Python group at Graham Chapmans memorial service and at the Monty Python Live At Aspen special. The song is a staple at Iron Maiden concerts, where the recording is played after the final encore.

Julian Doyle, the films editor, wrote The Life of Brian/Jesus, a book which not only describes the filmmaking and editing process but argues that it is the most accurate Biblical film ever made. In October 2008, a memoir by Kim "Howard" Johnson titled Monty Pythons Tunisian Holiday: My Life with Brian was released. Johnson became friendly with the Pythons during the filming of Life of Brian and his notes and memories of the behind-the-scenes filming and make-up. 
 television debate on talk show Friday Night, Saturday Morning between John Cleese and Michael Palin and Malcolm Muggeridge and Mervyn Stockwood, the then Bishop of Southwark. 

===Oratorio===
With the success of Eric Idles musical retelling of Monty Python and the Holy Grail, called Spamalot, Idle announced that he would be giving Life of Brian a similar treatment. The oratorio, called Not the Messiah (Hes a Very Naughty Boy), was commissioned to be part of the festival called Luminato in Toronto, Ontario, in June 2007, and was written/scored by Idle and John Du Prez, who also worked with Idle on Spamalot. Not the Messiah is a spoof of Handels oratorio Messiah (Handel)|Messiah. It runs approximately 50 minutes, and was conducted at its World Premiere by Toronto Symphony Orchestra music director Peter Oundjian, who is Idles cousin.    

Not the Messiah received its U.S. premiere at the Caramoor International Music Festival in Katonah, New York|Katonah, New York. Cousins Peter Oundjian (Caramoors Artistic Advisor and Principal Conductor) and Eric Idle joined forces once again for a double performance of the oratorio in July 2007.   

===Appearances in other media=== Spanish Inquisition."
 Talk Radio" host John Williams, of Chicagos WGN 720 AM, has used "Always Look on the Bright Side of Life" from Life of Brian in a segment of his Friday shows. The segment is used to highlight good events from the past week in listeners lives and to generally celebrate the end of the work week. In the 1997 Oscar winning film As Good as It Gets, the misanthropic character played by Jack Nicholson sings "Always Look on the Bright Side of Life" as evidence of the characters change in attitude. 
 Television Licence Fee: "What has the BBC ever given us?") 
 Former British Prime Minister Tony Blair in his Prime Ministers Questions of 3 May 2006 made a shorthand reference to the types of political groups, "Judean Peoples Front" or "Peoples Front of Judea", lampooned in Life of Brian.   This was in response to a question from the MP David Clelland, asking "What has the Labour government ever done for us?" – itself a parody of John Cleeses "What have the Romans ever done for us?"

On New Years Day 2007, and again on New Years Eve, UK television station Channel 4 dedicated an entire evening to the Monty Python phenomenon, during which an hour-long documentary was broadcast called The Secret Life of Brian about the making of The Life of Brian and the controversy that was caused by its release. The Pythons featured in the documentary and reflected upon the events that surrounded the film. This was followed by a screening of the film itself.  The documentary (in a slightly extended form) was one of the special features on the 2007 DVD re-release – the "Immaculate Edition", also the first Python release on Blu-ray Disc|Blu-ray.

==See also==
* List of films considered the best

==References==
 
*   This book chapter discusses the ancient sources which may have been used in the film and its critical take on theology.
* Hewison, Robert. Monty Python: The Case Against. New York: Grove, 1981. ISBN 0-413-48660-5. This book discusses at length the censorship and controversy surrounding the film.
* Vintaloro, Giordano. "Non sono il Messia, lo giuro su Dio!" – Messianismo e modernità in Life of Brian dei Monty Python. Trieste: Battello Stampatore, 2008. ISBN 978-88-87208-44-3.  . This book analyses the film structure as an hypertext and Brian the Messiah as a modern leader figure.

==External links==
 
*  
*  
*  
*  
*  
*  
*   – A 2007 documentary about the controversy surrounding the film.

 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 