Psycho (1960 film)
 
{{Infobox film
| name           = Psycho
| image          = Psycho (1960).jpg
| alt            = The poster features a large image of a young woman in white underwear. The names of the main actors are featured down the right side of the poster. Smaller images of Anthony Perkins and John Gavin are above the words, written in large print, "Alfred Hitchcocks Psycho".
| caption        = Theatrical release poster
| director       = Alfred Hitchcock
| producer       = Alfred Hitchcock
| screenplay     = Joseph Stefano
| based on       =  
| starring       = {{Plain list|
* Anthony Perkins
* Vera Miles
* John Gavin
* Martin Balsam
* John McIntire
* Janet Leigh
}}
| music          = Bernard Herrmann
| cinematography = John L. Russell
| editing        = George Tomasini
| studio         = Shamley Productions
| distributor    = Paramount Pictures
| released       =   
| runtime        = 109 minutes
| country        = United States   
| language       = English
| budget         = $806,947   
| gross          = $50 million   
}} horror film novel of the same name by Robert Bloch loosely inspired by the crimes of Wisconsin murderer and grave robber Ed Gein. 
 embezzling money Best Supporting Best Director for Hitchcock.
 television film TV series.

In 1992, the US Library of Congress deemed the film "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant" and selected it for preservation in the National Film Registry.

==Plot==
In Phoenix, Arizona, a real estate secretary named Marion Crane discusses with her boyfriend, Sam Loomis, how they cannot afford to get married because of Sams debts. After lunch, Marion returns to work, where a client drops off a $40,000 deposit on a property. Her boss asks her to deposit the money in the bank, and she asks if she can take the rest of the afternoon off. Returning home, she begins to pack for an unplanned trip, deciding to steal the money and give it to Sam in Fairville, California. She is seen by her boss on her way out of town, which makes her nervous. During the trip, she pulls over on the side of the road and falls asleep, only to be awakened by a state patrol officer. He is suspicious about her nervous behavior but allows her to drive on. Shaken by the encounter, Marion trades her Ford Mainline in for a Ford Custom 300 to avoid being found.

Taking a wrong turn, she ends up at the Bates Motel, where the proprietor, a young Norman Bates, invites her to a light dinner after she checks in. She accepts, but then hears an argument between Norman and a woman she presumes is his mother. Instead of dining at his home behind the motel, they eat in the motel parlor, where he tells her about his hobby of taxidermy and his life with his mother, Norma Bates (Psycho)|Norma, who is mentally ill. Returning to her room, Marion decides to go back to Phoenix to return the stolen money. She prepares to take a shower, unaware that Norman is spying on her from a peephole. As she is showering, a female figure suddenly appears and kills her with a butcher knife. Norman appears moments after the attacker flees and believes his mother to be responsible for the murder. He meticulously cleans up the crime scene, putting Marion and her possessions — including the money — into her car and sinking it in the swamps near the motel.

A week later, Marions sister Lila confronts Sam about the whereabouts of her sister. A private detective named Arbogast approaches them and confirms that Marion is wanted for stealing the $40,000 from her employer. He eventually comes across the Bates Motel, where Normans behavior arouses his suspicions. After hearing that Marion had met with Normans mother, he asks to speak with her, but Norman refuses. He calls Lila and Sam, informing them of what he has discovered and saying he intends to speak with Normans mother Norma. He goes to the Bates home in search of her; as he reaches the top of the stairs, a figure appears from the bedroom and murders him. When Lila and Sam do not hear from Arbogast, they go to the local sheriff, who informs them that Norma Bates has been dead for ten years, following the murder–suicide of her and her lover. Concerned, Lila and Sam make their way to the motel. Meanwhile, Norman takes his unwilling mother from her room, telling her he needs to hide her for a while and ignoring her objections.

At the motel, Lila and Sam meet Norman. Sam distracts him by striking up a conversation while Lila sneaks up to the house. When Norman realizes this, he knocks Sam out and rushes to the house. Lila sees Norman approaching and attempts to hide by going down into the cellar. There she finds a seated female figure and is shocked to discover that it is the skeletal remains of Norma. Lilas screams alert Norman, who runs to the cellar dressed in his mothers clothes and a wig. He tries to attack Lila but is subdued by Sam. 
 he had murdering her exhumed her corpse and began to treat it as if she were alive again. Whenever he became sexually attracted to any other woman, the abusive Norma would take control and kill the woman. In this state, Norman had killed two missing girls prior to Marion and Arbogast. While Norman sits in the room, Normas voice is heard protesting that the murders were Normans doing, not hers, and that she "wouldnt even harm a fly." As the film ends, Marions car is pulled out from the swamp.

==Cast==
* Anthony Perkins as Norman Bates
* Janet Leigh as Marion Crane
* Vera Miles as Lila Crane
* John Gavin as Sam Loomis
* Martin Balsam as Milton Arbogast
* John McIntire as Al Chambers
* Simon Oakland as Dr. Fred Richmond
* Frank Albertson as Tom Cassidy Pat Hitchcock as Caroline Vaughn Taylor as George Lowery
* Lurene Tuttle as Mrs. Chambers John Anderson as California Charlie
* Mort Mills as Highway Patrol Officer Norma Bates
* Ted Knight (uncredited) as a policeman guarding Norman Bates

The success of Psycho jump-started Perkins career, but he soon began to suffer from Typecasting (acting)|typecasting.  However, when Perkins was asked whether he would have still taken the role knowing that he would be typecast afterwards, he replied with a definite "yes". 

Until her death, Leigh continued to receive strange and sometimes threatening calls, letters, and even tapes detailing what they would like to do to Marion Crane. One letter was so "grotesque" that she passed it along to the FBI, two of whose agents visited Leigh and told her the culprits had been located and that she should notify the FBI if she received any more letters of that type. 

Normans mother was voiced by Virginia Gregg, Paul Jasmin, and Jeanette Nolan, who also provided some screams for Lilas discovery of the mothers corpse. The three voices were thoroughly mixed, except for the last speech, which is all Greggs. 
 double for Perkins in the shower sequence in Psycho, since he did not want any of Perkinss physicality to betray his identity at that point in the film. Dore wore the mothers costume and did all the stabbing actions. 

==Production==

===Development=== novel of the same name, loosely based on the case of convicted Wisconsin murderer Ed Gein.  Both Gein, who lived just 40 miles from Bloch, and the storys protagonist, Norman Bates, were solitary murderers in isolated rural locations. Each had deceased domineering mothers, sealed off a room in their home as a shrine to her, and dressed in womens clothes. However, unlike Bates, Gein is not strictly considered a serial killer, having been charged with murder only twice. 
 , featuring a 1959 Ford Custom 300 similar to that driven by Janet Leigh in the film (the car in the film is a 1957 Ford|57 model)]]
Peggy Robertson, Hitchcocks long-time assistant, read Anthony Bouchers positive review of the Bloch novel and decided to show the book to him, even though studio readers at Paramount Pictures had already rejected its premise for a film. Hitchcock acquired rights to the novel for $9,500 Leigh, p. 6  and reportedly ordered Robertson to buy up copies to preserve the novels surprises.  Hitchcock, who had come to face genre competitors whose works were critically compared to his own, was seeking new material to recover from two aborted projects with Paramount, Flamingo Feather and No Bail for the Judge. He disliked stars salary demands and trusted only a few people to choose prospective material, including Robertson. 
 Joan Harrison. 

===Novel adaptation===
James P. Cavanagh, a writer on the Alfred Hitchcock Presents television series, penned the original screenplay. The Making of Psycho, 1997 documentary directed by Laurent Bouzereau, Universal Studios Home Video, available on selected Psycho DVD releases.  Hitchcock felt the script dragged and read like a television short horror story, Leigh, pp. 36–37  an assessment shared by an assistant.  Though Stefano had worked on only one film before, Hitchcock agreed to meet with him; despite Stefanos inexperience the meeting went well and he was hired. 

The screenplay is relatively faithful to the novel, with a few notable adaptations by Hitchcock and Stefano. Stefano found the character of Norman Bates — who, in the book, is middle-aged, overweight, and more overtly unstable — unsympathetic, but became more intrigued when Hitchcock suggested casting Anthony Perkins.  Stefano eliminated Bates drinking,    which evidently necessitated removing Bates "becoming" the Mother personality when in a drunken stupor. Also gone is Bates interest in spiritualism, the occult and pornography.  Hitchcock and Stefano elected to open the film with scenes in Marions life and not introduce Bates at all until 20 minutes into the film, rather than open with Bates reading a history book as Bloch does.  Indeed, writer Joseph W. Smith notes that, "Her story occupies only two of the novels 17 chapters. Hitchcock and Stefano expanded this to nearly half the narrative".  He likewise notes there is no hotel tryst between Marion and Sam in the novel. For Stefano, the conversation between Marion and Norman in the hotel parlor in which she displays a maternal sympathy towards him makes it possible for the audience to switch their sympathies towards Norman Bates after Marions murder.    When Lila Crane is looking through Normans room in the film she opens a book with a blank cover whose contents are unseen; in the novel these are "pathologically pornographic" illustrations. Stefano wanted to give the audience "indications that something was quite wrong, but it could not be spelled out or overdone."  In his book of interviews with Hitchcock, François Truffaut notes that the novel "cheats" by having extended conversations between Norman and "Mother" and stating what Mother is "doing" at various given moments.  For obvious reasons, these were omitted from the film.
 pathology to Lila, the film uses a psychiatrist. Leigh, p. 39  (Stefano was in therapy dealing with his relationship with his own mother at the time of writing the film.)  The novel is more violent than the film; for instance, Crane is beheaded in the shower as opposed to being stabbed to death.  Minor changes include changing Marions telltale earring found after her death to a scrap of paper that failed to flush down the toilet. This provided some shock effect, since toilets were virtually never seen in American cinema in the 1960s.  The location of Arbogasts death was moved from the foyer to the stairwell. Stefano thought this would make it easier to conceal the truth about "Mother" without tipping that something was being hidden.  As Janet Leigh put it, this gave Hitchcock more options for his camera. 

===Pre-production=== No Bail Universal City near Hollywood and are a regular attraction on the Studio Tour|studios tour.   As a further result of cost cutting, Hitchcock chose to film Psycho in black and white, keeping the budget under $1,000,000.  Other reasons for shooting in black and white were his desire to prevent the shower scene from being too gory and his admiration for Les Diaboliques (film)|Les Diaboliquess use of black and white.  

To keep costs down, and because he was most comfortable around them, Hitchcock took most of his crew from his television series Alfred Hitchcock Presents, including the cinematographer, set designer, script supervisor, and first assistant director.  He hired regular collaborators Bernard Herrmann as music composer, George Tomasini as editor, and Saul Bass for the title design and storyboarding of the shower scene. In all, his crew cost $62,000. Leigh, pp. 12–13 

Through the strength of his reputation, Hitchcock cast Leigh for a quarter of her usual fee, paying only $25,000 (in the 1967 book Hitchcock/Truffaut, Hitchcock said that Leigh owed Paramount one final film on her seven-year contract which she had signed in 1953).  His first choice, Leigh agreed after having only read the novel and making no inquiry into her salary.  Her co-star, Anthony Perkins, agreed to $40,000.  Both stars were experienced and proven box-office draws.

Paramount did distribute the film, but four years later Hitchcock sold his stock in Shamley to Universals parent company and his next six films were made at and distributed by Universal Pictures.  After another four years, Paramount sold all rights to Universal. 

===Filming===
The film, independently produced and financed by Hitchcock, was shot at Revue Studios,  the same location as his television show. Psycho was shot on a tight budget of $806,947.55, Leigh, pp. 22–23  beginning on November 11, 1959 and ending on February 1, 1960.   Filming started in the morning and finished by six or earlier on Thursdays (when Hitchcock and his wife would dine at Chasens).  Nearly the whole film was shot with 50&nbsp;mm lenses on 35&nbsp;mm cameras. This trick closely mimicked normal human vision, which helped to further involve the audience. 

Before shooting began in November, Hitchcock dispatched assistant director Hilton A. Green to Phoenix to scout locations and shoot the opening scene. The shot was supposed to be an aerial shot of Phoenix that slowly zoomed into the hotel window of a passionate Marion and Sam. Ultimately, the helicopter footage proved too shaky and had to be spliced with footage from the studio. Leigh, pp. 24–26  Another crew filmed day and night footage on Highway 99 between Fresno and Bakersfield, California for projection when Marion drives from Phoenix. They also provided the location shots for the scene in which she is discovered sleeping in her car by the highway patrolman.  In one street scene shot in downtown Phoenix, Christmas decorations were discovered to be visible; rather than re-shoot the footage, Hitchcock chose to add a graphic to the opening scene marking the date as "Friday, December the Eleventh". 

 s The House by the Railroad, used as inspiration for the look of the Bates house.|alt=A painting of a large, imposing Gothic house]] Second Empire Victorian home at 18 Conger Avenue in Haverstraw, NY. 

Both the leads, Perkins and Leigh, were given freedom to interpret their roles and improvise as long as it did not involve moving the camera. Leigh, p. 73  An example of Perkins improvisation is Normans habit of eating candy corn. 

Throughout filming, Hitchcock created and hid various versions of the "Mother corpse" prop in Leighs dressing room closet. Leigh took the joke well, and she wondered whether it was done to keep her on edge and thus more in character or to judge which corpse would be scarier for the audience. 

During shooting, Hitchcock was forced to uncharacteristically do retakes for some scenes. The final shot in the shower scene, which starts with an extreme close-up on Marions eye and pulls up and out, proved very difficult for Leigh, since the water splashing in her face made her want to blink, and the cameraman had trouble as well since he had to manually focus while moving the camera.  Retakes were also required for the opening scene, since Hitchcock felt that Leigh and Gavin were not passionate enough.  Leigh had trouble saying "Not inordinately" for the real estate office scene, requiring additional retakes.  Lastly, the scene in which the mother is discovered required complicated coordination of the chair turning around, Miles hitting the light bulb, and a lens flare, which proved to be the sticking point. Hitchcock forced retakes until all three elements were to his satisfaction. 

According to Hitchcock, a series of shots with Arbogast going up the stairs in the Bates house before he is stabbed were helmed by assistant director Hilton A. Green, working with storyboard artist Saul Bass drawings only while Hitchcock was incapacitated with the common cold. However, upon viewing the dailies of the shots, Hitchcock was forced to scrap them. He claimed they were "no good" because they did not portray "an innocent person but a sinister man who was going up those stairs".    Hitchcock later re-shot the scene, though a little of the cut footage made its way into the film. Filming the murder of Arbogast proved problematic owing to the overhead camera angle necessary to hide the films twist. A camera track constructed on pulleys alongside the stairway together with a chairlike device had to be constructed and thoroughly tested over a period of weeks. 
 Alfred Hitchcocks Stetson hat – standing outside Marion Cranes office.  Wardrobe-mistress Rita Riggs has said that Hitchcock chose this scene for his cameo so that he could be in a scene with his daughter (who played one of Marions colleagues). Others have suggested that he chose this early appearance in the film in order to avoid distracting the audience. 

===The shower scene===
The murder of Leighs character in the shower is the films pivotal scene and one of the best-known in all of cinema. As such, it spawned numerous myths and legends. It was shot from December 17–23, 1959, and features 77 different camera angles.  The scene "runs 3 minutes and includes 50 cuts."      Most of the shots are extreme close-ups, except for medium shots in the shower directly before and directly after the murder. The combination of the close shots with their short duration makes the sequence feel more subjective than it would have been if the images were presented alone or in a wider angle, an example of the technique Hitchcock described as "transferring the menace from the screen into the mind of the audience". 

 
In order to capture the straight-on shot of the shower head, the camera had to be equipped with a long lens. The inner holes on the shower head were blocked and the camera placed a sufficient distance away so that the water, while appearing to be aimed directly at the lens, actually went around and past it. 
 Bosco chocolate syrup,  which shows up better on black-and-white film, and has more realistic density than stage blood. The 100 Greatest Movies of All Time. New York: Entertainment Weekly Books, 1999  The sound of the knife entering flesh was created by plunging a knife into a casaba melon.  

There are varying accounts whether Leigh was in the shower the entire time or a body double was used for some parts of the murder sequence and its aftermath. In an interview with Roger Ebert and in the book Alfred Hitchcock and the Making of Psycho, Leigh stated she was in the scene the entire time and Hitchcock only used a stand-in for the sequence in which Norman wraps Marions body in a shower curtain and places it in the trunk of her car.  The 2010 book The Girl in Alfred Hitchcocks Shower by Robert Graysmith contradicts this, identifying Marli Renfro as Leighs body double for some of the shower scenes shots. 

A popular myth emerged that, in order for Leighs scream in the shower to sound realistic, ice-cold water was used. Leigh denied this on numerous occasions, saying the crew was very accommodating, supplying hot water throughout the week-long shoot.  All of the screams are Leighs. Leigh, p. 83 

Another concerns  , the assistant director, also refutes Bass claim: "There is not a shot in that movie that I didnt roll the camera for. And I can tell you I never rolled the camera for Mr. Bass."  Roger Ebert, a longtime admirer of Hitchcocks work, summarily dismissed the rumor, stating, "It seems unlikely that a perfectionist with an ego like Hitchcocks would let someone else direct such a scene." 

However, commentators such as Stephen Rebello and Bill Krohn have argued in favor of Bass contribution to the scene in his capacity as visual consultant and storyboard artist.  Along with designing the opening credits, Bass is termed "Pictorial Consultant" in the credits. When interviewing Hitchcock in 1967, François Truffaut asked about the extent of Bass contribution, to which Hitchcock replied that in addition to the titles, Bass had provided storyboards for the Arbogast murder (which he claimed to have rejected), but made no mention of Bass providing storyboards for the shower scene.  According to Bill Krohns Hitchcock At Work, Bass first claim to have directed the scene was in 1970, when he provided a magazine with 48 drawings used as storyboards as proof of his contribution.    

Krohns analysis of the production of Psycho in his book Hitchcock at Work, while refuting Bass claims for directing the scene, notes that these storyboards did introduce key aspects of the final scene—most notably, the fact that the killer appears as a silhouette, and details such as the close-ups of the slashing knife, Leighs desperate outstretched arm, the shower curtain being torn down, and the transition from the hole of the drainage pipe to Marion Cranes dead eyes. Krohn notes that this final transition is highly reminiscent of the iris titles that Bass created for Vertigo (film)|Vertigo. 
 BNC Mitchell, the other a handheld camera called an Eclair (camera)|Éclair which Orson Welles had used in Touch of Evil (1958). In order to create an ideal montage for the greatest emotional impact on the audience, Hitchcock shot a lot of footage of this scene which he trimmed down in the editing room. He even brought a Moviola on the set to gauge the footage required. The final sequence, which his editor George Tomasini worked on with Hitchcocks advice, however did not go far beyond the basic structural elements set up by Bass storyboards. 

According to  , talking in Laurent Bouzereaus "making of" documentary, Alma spotted that Leighs character appeared to take a breath. In either case, the postmortem activity was edited out and was never seen by audiences.  Although Marions eyes should be dilated after her death, the contact lenses necessary for this effect would have required six weeks of acclimatization to wear them, so Hitchcock decided to forgo them. 

It is often claimed that, despite its graphic nature, the "shower scene" never once shows a knife puncturing flesh.      However, a frame by frame analysis of the sequence shows one shot in which the knife appears to penetrate Leighs abdomen, but the effect may have been created by lighting and reverse motion.  Leigh herself was so affected by this scene when she saw it, that she no longer took showers unless she absolutely had to; she would lock all the doors and windows and would leave the bathroom and shower door open.  She never realized until she first watched the film "how vulnerable and defenseless one is". 

Leigh and Hitchcock fully discussed what the scene meant:
 
 Film theorist Robin Wood alienation effect" of killing off the "apparent center of the film" with which spectators had identified.   

==Soundtrack==

===Score=== score for Psycho despite the composers refusal to accept a reduced fee for the films lower budget.    The resulting score, according to Christopher Palmer in The Composer in Hollywood (1990) is "perhaps Herrmanns most spectacular Hitchcock achievement."  Hitchcock was pleased with the tension and drama the score added to the film,    later remarking "33% of the effect of Psycho was due to the music."    The singular contribution of Herrmanns score may be inferred from the unusual penultimate placement of the composers name in the films opening credit sequence, as it is followed only by Hitchcocks directing credit.

Herrmann used the lowered music budget to his advantage by writing for a string orchestra rather than a full symphonic ensemble,  contrary to Hitchcocks request for a jazz score.  He thought of the single tone color of the all-string soundtrack as a way of reflecting the black-and-white cinematography of the film.    The strings play con sordini (with a muting device placed across the bridge) for all the music other than the shower scene, creating a darker and more intense effect. Hollywood composer Fred Steiner, in an analysis of the score to Psycho, points out that string instruments gave Herrmann access to a wider range in tone, dynamics, and instrumental special effects than any other single instrumental group would have. 

The main title music, a tense, hurtling piece, sets the tone of impending violence, and returns three times on the soundtrack.     Though nothing shocking occurs during the first 15–20 minutes of the film, the title music remains in the audiences mind, lending tension to these early scenes.  Herrmann also maintains tension through the slower moments in the film through the use of ostinato. 

There were rumors that Herrmann had used electronic means, including amplified bird screeches to achieve the shocking effect of the music in the shower scene. The effect was achieved, however, only with violins in a "screeching, stabbing sound-motion of extraordinary viciousness."    The only electronic amplification employed was in the placing of the microphones close to the instruments, to get a harsher sound.  Besides the emotional impact, the shower scene cue ties the soundtrack to birds.  The association of the shower scene music with birds also telegraphs to the audience that it is Norman, the stuffed-bird collector, who is the murderer rather than his mother. 

Herrmann biographer Steven C. Smith writes that the music for the shower scene is "probably the most famous (and most imitated) cue in film music,"  but Hitchcock was originally opposed to having music in this scene.  When Herrmann played the shower scene cue for Hitchcock, the director approved its use in the film. Herrmann reminded Hitchcock of his instructions not to score this scene, to which Hitchcock replied, "Improper suggestion, my boy, improper suggestion."  This was one of two important disagreements Hitchcock had with Herrmann, in which Herrmann ignored Hitchcocks instructions. The second one, over the score for Torn Curtain (1966), resulted in the end of their professional collaboration.  A survey conducted by PRS for Music, in 2009, showed that the British public consider the score from the shower scene to be the scariest theme from any film. 

To honor the fiftieth anniversary of Psycho, in July 2010, the San Francisco Symphony  obtained a print of the film with the soundtrack removed, and projected it on a large screen in Davies Symphony Hall while the orchestra performed the score live. This was previously mounted by the Seattle Symphony in October 2009 as well, performing at the Benaroya Hall for two consecutive evenings. These performances are part of John Gobermans offering of films with great music performed by live orchestras: A Symphonic Night at the Movies, these special events range from "Alexander Nevsky" to "Singin in the Rain" to "Hitchcock!".

===Recordings===
Several CDs of the film soundtrack have been released, including:
* The 1970s soundtrack recording with Bernard Herrmann conducting the National Philharmonic Orchestra  .  . Americanmusicpreservation.com (1960-06-16). Retrieved on 2010-11-21. 
* The 1997 Varèse Sarabande CD features a re-recording of the complete score performed by the Royal Scottish National Orchestra and conducted by Joel McNeely .  . SoundtrackCollector. Retrieved on 2010-11-21.  
* The 1998 Soundstage Records SCD 585 CD claims to feature the tracks from the original master tapes. However, it has been asserted that the release is a bootleg recording. 
* The 2011 Doxy Records DOY650 (Italy) 180 gram LP release of the complete original 1960 score conducted by Herrmann.

;Track listing (Psycho — Soundstage Records)
:All pieces by Bernard Herrmann.
# "Prelude; The City; Marion and Sam; Temptation" – 6:15
# "Flight; The Patrol Car; The Car Lot; The Package; The Rainstorm" – 7:21
# "Hotel Room; The Window; The Parlour; The Madhouse; The Peephole" – 8:52
# "The Bathroom; The Murder; The Body; The Office; The Curtain; The Water; The Car; The Swamp" – 6:58
# "The Search; The Shadow; Phone Booth; The Porch; The Stairs; The Knife" – 5:41
# "The Search; The First Floor; Cabin 10; Cabin 1" – 6:18
# "The Hill; The Bedroom; The Toys; The Cellar; Discovery; Finale" – 5:00

==Controversy==
  Production Code. It was unprecedented in its depiction of sexuality and violence, right from the opening scene in which Sam and Marion are shown as lovers sharing the same bed, with Marion in a bra.  In the Production Code standards of that time, unmarried couples shown in the same bed would be taboo. 

According to the book Alfred Hitchcock and the Making of Psycho, the censors in charge of enforcing the Production Code wrangled with Hitchcock because some of them insisted they could see one of Leighs breasts. Hitchcock held onto the print for several days, left it untouched, and resubmitted it for approval. Each of the censors reversed their positions: those who had previously seen the breast now did not, and those who had not, now did. They passed the film after the director removed one shot that showed the buttocks of Leighs stand-in. Leigh, p. 112  The board was also upset by the racy opening, so Hitchcock said that if they let him keep the shower scene he would re-shoot the opening with them on the set. Since they did not show up for the re-shoot, the opening stayed. 

Another cause of concern for the censors was that Marion was shown flushing a toilet, with its contents (torn-up note paper) fully visible. No flushing toilet had appeared in mainstream film and television in the United States at that time.     

Internationally, Hitchcock was forced to make minor changes to the film, mostly to the shower scene. In Britain, the BBFC requested cuts to stabbing sounds and visible nude shots, and in New Zealand the shot of Norman washing blood from his hands was objected to. In Singapore, though the shower scene was left untouched, the murder of Arbogast, and a shot of Mothers corpse were removed. Leigh, pp. 105–6 
 Clouzot had done the same in France for Les Diaboliques (film)|Diabolique.  Hitchcock thought that if people entered the theater late and never saw the star actress Janet Leigh, they would feel cheated.  At first theater owners opposed the idea, claiming that they would lose business. However, after the first day, the owners enjoyed long lines of people waiting to see the film. 

==Promotion==
Hitchcock did most of the promotion on his own, forbidding Leigh and Perkins to make the usual television, radio, and print interviews for fear of their revealing the plot.  Even critics were not given private screenings but rather had to see the film with the general public, which, despite possibly affecting their reviews,  certainly preserved the secret.

The films original trailer features a jovial Hitchcock taking the viewer on a tour of the set, and almost giving away plot details before stopping himself. It is "tracked" with Herrmanns Psycho theme, but also jovial music from Hitchcocks comedy The Trouble with Harry; most of Hitchcocks dialogue is post-synchronized. The trailer was made after completion of the film, and since Janet Leigh was no longer available for filming, Hitchcock had Vera Miles don a blonde wig and scream loudly as he pulled the shower curtain back in the bathroom sequence of the preview. Since the title, "Psycho", instantly covers most of the screen, the switch went unnoticed by audiences for years. However, a freeze-frame analysis clearly reveals that it is Miles and not Leigh in the shower during the trailer. 
 Apollo pad fire of January 27, 1967, the network washed its hands of Psycho, Leigh, p. 187  and shortly afterward Paramount included the film in its first syndicated package of post-1950 movies, "Portfolio I". WABC-TV in New York City was the first station in the country to air Psycho (with some scenes significantly edited), on its late-night movie series, The Best of Broadway, on June 24, 1967.  Following another successful theatrical reissue in 1969, the film finally made its way to general television airing in one of Universals syndicated programming packages for local stations in 1970. Psycho was aired for twenty years in this format, then leased to cable for two years before returning to syndication as part of the "List of a Lifetime" package. 

==Interpretations==

===Subversion of romance through irony===
In Psycho, Hitchcock subverts the romantic elements that are seen in most of his work. The film is instead ironic as it prevents "clarity and fulfillment" of romance. The past is central to the film; the main characters "struggle to understand and resolve destructive personal histories" and ultimately fail.    Lesley Brill writes, "The inexorable forces of past sins and mistakes crush hopes for regeneration and present happiness." The crushed hope is highlighted by the death of the protagonist, Marion Crane, halfway through the film.  Marion is like Persephone of Greek mythology, who is abducted temporarily from the world of the living. The myth does not sustain with Marion, who dies hopelessly in her room at the Bates Motel. The room is wallpapered with floral print like Persephones flowers, but they are only "reflected in mirrors, as images of images—twice removed from reality". In the scene of Marions death, Brill describes the transition from the bathroom drain to Marions lifeless eye, "Like the eye of the amorphous sea creature at the end of Fellinis La Dolce Vita, it marks the birth of death, an emblem of final hopelessness and corruption." Unlike heroines in Hitchcocks other films, she does not reestablish her innocence or discover love.   

Marion is deprived of "the humble treasures of love, marriage, home and family", which Hitchcock considers elements of human happiness. There exists among Psycho s secondary characters a lack of "familial warmth and stability", which demonstrates the unlikelihood of domestic fantasies. The film contains ironic jokes about domesticity, such as when Sam writes a letter to Marion, agreeing to marry her, only after the audience sees her buried in the swamp. Sam and Marions sister Lila, in investigating Marions disappearance, develop an "increasingly connubial" relationship, a development that Marion is denied.    Norman also suffers a similarly perverse definition of domesticity. He has "an infantile and divided personality" and lives in a mansion whose past occupies the present. Norman displays stuffed birds that are "frozen in time" and keeps childhood toys and stuffed animals in his room. He is hostile toward suggestions to move from the past, such as with Marions suggestion to put
his mother "someplace" and as a result kills Marion to preserve his past. Brill explains, "Someplace for Norman is where his delusions of love, home, and family are declared invalid and exposed." 

Light and darkness feature prominently in Psycho. The first shot after the intertitle is the sunny landscape of Phoenix before the camera enters a dark hotel room where Sam and Marion appear as bright figures. Marion is almost immediately cast in darkness; she is preceded by her shadow as she reenters the office to steal money and as she enters her bedroom. When she flees Phoenix, darkness descends on her drive. The following sunny morning is punctured by a watchful police officer with black sunglasses, and she finally arrives at the Bates Motel in near darkness.    Bright lights are also "the ironic equivalent of darkness" in the film, blinding instead of illuminating. Examples of brightness include the opening window shades in Sams and Marions hotel room, vehicle headlights at night, the neon sign at the Bates Motel, "the glaring white" of the bathroom tiles where Marion dies, and the fruit cellars exposed light bulb shining on the corpse of Normans mother. Such bright lights typically characterize danger and violence in Hitchcocks films.   

===Motifs=== backlighting turns the rakes in the hardware store into talons above Lilas head. Leigh, pp. 90–93 

Mirrors reflect Marion as she packs, her eyes as she checks the rear-view mirror, her face in the policemans sunglasses, and her hands as she counts out the money in the car dealerships bathroom. A motel window serves as a mirror by reflecting Marion and Norman together. Hitchcock shoots through Marions windshield and the telephone booth, when Arbogast phones Sam and Lila. The heavy downpour can be seen as a foreshadowing of the shower, and its cessation can be seen as a symbol of Marion making up her mind to return to Phoenix. 

There are a number of references to birds. Marions last name is Crane and she is from Phoenix. Norman comments that Marion eats like a bird. The motel room has pictures of birds on the wall. Brigitte Peucker also suggests that Normans hobby of stuffing birds literalizes the British slang expression for sex, "stuffing birds", bird being a British slang for a desirable woman.  Robert Allan suggests that Normans mother is his original "stuffed bird", both in the sense of having preserved her body and the incestuous nature of Normans emotional bond with her. 

===Psychoanalytic interpretation=== psychoanalytical thriller."    The sex and violence in the film were unlike anything previously seen in a mainstream film. "The shower scene is both feared and desired," wrote French film critic Serge Kaganski. "Hitchcock may be scaring his female viewers out of their wits, but he is turning his male viewers into potential rapists, since Janet Leigh has been turning men on ever since she appeared in her brassiere in the first scene." 

In his documentary  , where Bates mother lives; the ground floor is then Bates Id, ego and super-ego|ego, where he functions as an apparently normal human being; and finally, the basement would be Bates Id, ego, and super-ego|id. Žižek interprets Bates moving his mothers corpse from top floor to basement as a symbol for the deep connection that psychoanalysis posits between superego and id. 

==Reception==
Initial reviews of the film were thoroughly mixed. Leigh, pp. 99–102  Bosley Crowther of The New York Times wrote, "There is not an abundance of subtlety or the lately familiar Hitchcock bent toward significant and colorful scenery in this obviously low-budget job." Crowther called the "slow buildups to sudden shocks" reliably melodramatic but contested Hitchcocks psychological points, reminiscent of Richard von Krafft-Ebing|Krafft-Ebings studies, as less effective. While the film did not conclude satisfactorily for the critic, he commended the casts performances as "fair".  British critic C. A. Lejeune was so offended that she not only walked out before the end but permanently resigned her post as film critic for The Observer.  Other negative reviews stated, "a blot on an honorable career", "plainly a gimmick movie", and "merely one of those television shows padded out to two hours."   Positive reviews stated, "Anthony Perkins performance is the best of his career&nbsp;... Janet Leigh has never been better", "played out beautifully", and "first American movie since Touch of Evil to stand in the same creative rank as the great European films."   A good example of the mix is the New York Herald Tribune s review, which stated, "...&nbsp;rather difficult to be amused at the forms insanity may take&nbsp;... keeps your attention like a snake-charmer." 

The public loved the film, with lines stretching outside of theaters as people had to wait for the next showing. This, along with box office numbers, led to a reconsideration of the film by critics, and it eventually received a very large amount of praise. It broke box-office records in Japan and the rest of Asia, France, Britain, South America, the United States, and Canada, and was a moderate success in Australia for a brief period.  It was the most profitable black-and-white sound film ever made,  and Hitchcock personally realized well in excess of $15 million (about $120m today). He then swapped his rights to Psycho and his TV anthology for 150,000 shares of MCA Inc.|MCA, making him the third largest shareholder in MCA Inc. and his own boss at Universal, in theory; however, this did not stop them from interfering with his later films.   Psycho was, by a large margin, the most profitable film of Hitchcocks career, earning over $12 million for the studio on release, and $15 million by the end of the year. Hitchcocks second most profitable was Family Plot ($7,541,000), and third place was a tie between Torn Curtain (1966) and Frenzy (1972), each earning $6,500,000. Around the time of the runs end, the film had grossed $32 million in domestic theaters. 

In the United Kingdom, the film shattered attendance records at the London Plaza Movie theatre|Cinema, but nearly all British critics panned it, questioning Hitchcocks taste and judgment. Reasons cited for this were the critics late screenings, forcing them to rush their reviews, their dislike of the gimmicky promotion, and Hitchcocks expatriate status. Leigh, pp. 103–106  Perhaps thanks to the publics response and Hitchcocks efforts at promoting it, the critics did a re-review, and the film was praised. Time (magazine)|TIME switched its opinion from "Hitchcock bears down too heavily in this one" to "superlative" and "masterly", and Bosley Crowther put it on his Top Ten list of 1960. 
 The Nanny    (1965) starring Bette Davis and William Castles Homicidal (1961) was followed by a slew of more than thirteen other splatter films. 

On the review aggregator website, RottenTomatoes.com, Psycho holds a Certified: Fresh score of 96%, with the critics consensus reading: "Infamous for its shower scene, but immortal for its contribution to the horror genre. Because Psycho was filmed with tact, grace, and art, Hitchcock didnt just create modern horror, he validated it". 

==Recognition==
{| class="wikitable" style="margin:auto; width:100%;"
|-
! Award !! Category !! Name !! Outcome
|- 33rd Academy Academy Awards (33rd) Best Director
| Alfred Hitchcock
|  
|- Best Supporting Actress
| Janet Leigh
|  
|- Best Cinematography, Black-and White
| John L. Russell
|  
|- Best Art Direction-Set Decoration, Black-and-White Joseph Hurley, Robert Clatworthy, George Milo
|  
|-
| Directors Guild of America
| Outstanding Directorial Achievement in Motion Pictures
| Alfred Hitchcock
|  
|-
| Edgar Allan Poe Awards
| Best Motion Picture
| Joseph Stefano (screenwriter), Robert Bloch (author)
|  
|-
| International Board of Motion Picture Reviewers
| Best Actor
| Anthony Perkins
|   (tie)
|- Golden Globe Awards (18th) Best Supporting Actress
| Janet Leigh
|  
|-
| Writers Guild of America, East
| Best Written American Drama
| Joseph Stefano
|  
|}

In 1992, the film was deemed "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant" by the United States Library of Congress and was selected for preservation in the National Film Registry.

In 1998, TV Guide ranked it #8 on their list of the 50 Greatest Movies on TV (and Video). 

Leigh asserted, "no other murder mystery in the history of the movies has inspired such merchandising." Leigh, p. 186  Any number of items emblazoned with Bates Motel, stills, lobby cards, and highly valuable posters are available for purchase. In 1992, it was adapted scene-for-scene into three comic books by the Innovative Corporation. 
 Bravo Networks 100 Scariest Movie Moments,  whilst the finale was ranked number four on Premiere (magazine)|Premiere s similar list.  Entertainment Weeklys book titled The 100 Greatest Movies of All Time ranked the film as #11. 

;American Film Institute lists
* AFIs 100 Years...100 Movies – #18
* AFIs 100 Years...100 Thrills – #1
* AFIs 100 Years...100 Heroes and Villains:
** Norman Bates – #2 Villain
* AFIs 100 Years...100 Movie Quotes:
** "A boys best friend is his mother." – #56
** "We all go a little mad sometimes." – Nominated 
* AFIs 100 Years of Film Scores – #4
* AFIs 100 Years...100 Movies (10th Anniversary Edition) – #14

==Legacy==

===Sequels===
Three sequels were produced:   (1990), the last being a part-prequel television movie written by the original screenplay author, Joseph Stefano. Anthony Perkins returned to his role of Norman Bates in all three sequels, and also directed the third film. The voice of Norman Bates mother was maintained by noted radio actress Virginia Gregg with the exception of Psycho IV, where the role was played by Olivia Hussey. Vera Miles also reprised her role of Lila Crane in Psycho II.  The sequels were well received but considered inferior to the original.  

===1987 Bates Motel pilot=== Bates Motel was a failed television pilot Spin-off (media)|spin-off which later aired as a television movie (before the release of Psycho IV). Anthony Perkins declined to appear in the pilot, so Normans cameo appearance was played by Kurt Paul, who was Perkins stunt double on Psycho II and III. 

===1998 remake=== 1998 remake of Psycho. The film is in color and features a different cast, but aside from this it is a near shot-for-shot remake copying Hitchcocks camera movements and editing.  The film was panned by critics and audiences alike and was a box office bomb.

A Conversation with Norman (2005), directed by Jonathan M. Parisen, was a film inspired by Psycho.

===2012 Hitchcock film=== Ryan Murphy.  Later the film was retitled Hitchcock (film)|Hitchcock, and filming began on April 13, 2012.  Filming was completed in early June 2012 with a worldwide release on December 14, 2012. The film centers on the relationship between Hitchcock and his wife and co-worker Alma Reville during the filming of Psycho in 1959. The film was directed by Sacha Gervasi and written by John McLaughlin and Stephen Rebello. The film stars Anthony Hopkins as Hitchcock, Helen Mirren as Reville, Scarlett Johansson as Janet Leigh, Jessica Biel as Vera Miles, and James DArcy as Anthony Perkins. The film was released worldwide on December 14, 2012, to mostly positive reviews and one Academy Award nomination.

===The Psycho Legacy=== documentary called The Psycho Legacy was released on DVD. The documentary discussed the legacy and impact Psycho has had, not only on cinema, but on the world in general. The documentary also included production stories about Psycho II, Psycho III and Psycho IV: The Beginning. This documentary received mostly positive reviews from critics and fans.

===Bates Motel series===
On January 13, 2012, A&E announced that a television series called  .  However, the series is set in the present day in a seaside town in Oregon rather than the inland California town of the film - thus the series is a Reboot (fiction)|reboot, though its been widely reviewed as a prequel, as it is devoted to providing a backstory to a younger Norman Bates prior to his becoming a murderer. In July 2012, A&E announced that the network had picked up the show for a 10 episode first season, skipping the initial pilot stage. The series premiered on March 18, 2013 to high ratings and very positive reviews. The show aired a second season in 2014 and a third in 2015.

===Psychos===
On February 24, 2014, a   of the two films by Soderbergh. Reaction to the mashup appears to reinforce the prejudice against the 1998 film. The opening credits intermingle names from both the 1960 and 1998 versions, and all color has been removed from Van Sants scenes.  

==Cultural impact==
Psycho has become one of the most recognizable films in cinema history, and is arguably Hitchcocks best known film.   In his novel, Bloch used an uncommon plot structure: he repeatedly introduced sympathetic protagonists, then killed them off. This played on his readers expectations of traditional plots, leaving them uncertain and anxious. Hitchcock recognized the effect this approach could have on audiences, and utilized it in his adaptation, killing off Leighs character at the end of the first act. This daring plot device, coupled with the fact that the character was played by the biggest box-office name in the film, was a shocking turn of events in 1960.  . Retrieved November 20, 2010. 
 Soviet montage Charlie and the Chocolate Factory, among many others). 
 Vanity Fair.  Cotillard shares the same first name of Janet Leighs character in Psycho, who was called Marion Crane. 
 Fade to Dressed to Manuel Muñozs 2011 novel What You See in the Dark includes a sub-plot that fictionalizes elements of the filming of Psycho, referring to Hitchcock and Leigh only as "The Director" and "The Actress". Muñoz, Manuel. What You See in the Dark, 2011, Algonquin Books.  In the comic book stories of Jonni Future, the house inherited by title character is patterned after the Bates Motel. George Khoury and Eric Nolen-Weathington. Modern Masters Volume Six: Arthur Adams, 2006, TwoMorrows Publishing. 
 Brother From The Same Planet" (Principal Skinner looks over his shoulder at his house and sees his mother, Agnes, in the window, and screams).

==Ratings==
Psycho has been rated and re-rated several times over the years by the Motion Picture Association of America|MPAA. Upon its initial release, the film received a certificate stating that it was "Approved" (certificate #19564) under the simple pass/fail system of the Production Code in use at that time. Later, when the MPAA switched to a voluntary letter ratings system in 1968, Psycho was one of a number of high-profile motion pictures to be retro-rated with an "M" (Mature Audiences).    This remained the only rating the film would receive for 16 years, and according to the guidelines of the time "M" was the equivalent of a "PG" rating.       Then, in 1984, during the uproar of increased parental concern regarding violence in "PG" films,   Psycho was retro-rated again to its current rating of "R". This rating took effect, however, before the institution of the "PG-13" rating by the MPAA that same year, and there are those who have speculated that if the rating had existed at the time, or if Psycho were rated in America today, it would receive a "PG-13".   

==Home media==
The film has been released several times on videotape, LaserDisc, DVD, and Blu-ray Disc. MCA DiscoVision Incorporated (parent company, MCA Inc) first released Psycho on the LaserDisc format in "standard play" (5 sides) in 1979, and "extended play" (2 sides) in October 1981. MCA/Universal Home Video released a new LaserDisc version of Psycho in August 1988 (Catalog #: 11003). In May 1998, Universal Studios Home Video released a deluxe edition of Psycho as part of their Signature Collection. This THX® certified Widescreen (1.85:1) LaserDisc Deluxe Edition (Catalog #: 43105) is spread across 4 extended play sides and 1 standard play side, and includes a new documentary and isolated Bernard Herrmann score. A DVD edition was released in at the same time as the LaserDisc.   

Laurent Bouzereau produced a documentary looking at the films production and reception for the initial DVD release. Universal released a fiftieth Anniversary edition on Blu-ray Disc|Blu-ray in the United Kingdom on August 9, 2010,  with Australia following with the same edition (featuring a different cover) being made available on September 1, 2010.  A Blu-ray in US was released on October 19, 2010 to mark the films 50th anniversary, featuring yet another different cover.    The film is also included on two different Alfred Hitchcock Blu-ray boxsets from Universal.  

==See also==
 
* Hitchcock (film)|Hitchcock, a 2012 biopic film about Hitchcock and the making of Psycho with Anthony Hopkins as Hitchcock, Helen Mirren as his wife Alma, Scarlett Johansson as Janet Leigh, and James DArcy as Anthony Perkins.

==References==
 

;Bibliography
*  
*  
*  
*  
*  
*  
*  
*  
*  
*  
*  
* 
*  
*  
*  
*  
*  
*  
*  

==Further reading==
The following publications are among those devoted to the production of Psycho: Avon Books, fumetti of the entire motion picture.
* Raymond Durgnat|Durgnat, Raymond E. A Long Hard Look at Psycho (BFI Film Classics). British Film Institute, 2002.
* Kolker, Robert; editor. Alfred Hitchcocks Psycho: A Casebook. Oxford University Press, 2005.
* Janet Leigh|Leigh, Janet with Christopher Nickens. Psycho: Behind the Scenes of the Classic Thriller. Harmony Press, 1995.
* James Naremore|Naremore, James. Filmguide to Psycho. Indiana University Press, 1973.
* Stephen Rebello|Rebello, Stephen. Alfred Hitchcock and the Making of Psycho. Dembner Books, 1990. A definitive "making of" account tracing every stage of the production of the film as well as its aftermath.
* Rebello, Stephen. "Psycho: The Making of Alfred Hitchcocks Masterpiece". "Cinefantastique", April 1986 (Volume 16, Number 4/5). Comprehensive 22-page article.
* Skerry, Philip J. The Shower Scene in Hitchcocks Psycho: Creating Cinematic Suspense and Terror. Edwin Mellen Press, 2005.
* Smith, Joseph W., III. The Psycho File: A Comprehensive Guide to Hitchcocks Classic Shocker. McFarland, 2009.
* David Thomson (film critic)|Thomson, David, The Moment of Psycho (2009) ISBN 978-0-465-00339-6

==External links==
 
 
*  
*  
*  
*  
*   In-depth analysis of the film
*  
*   by Gary Susman – Moviefone – June 15, 2010

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 