Star Trek Generations
 
{{Infobox film
| name           = Star Trek  Generations
| image          = S07-Star Trek Generations-poster art.png
| image_size     = 
| alt            = 
| caption        = Theatrical release poster art David Carson
| producer       = Rick Berman
| screenplay     = Ronald D. Moore Brannon Braga
| story          = Rick Berman Ronald D. Moore Brannon Braga
| based on       = Star Trek by Gene Roddenberry See Cast Dennis McCarthy
| cinematography = John A. Alonzo
| editing        = Peter E. Berger
| distributor    = Paramount Pictures
| released       =  
| runtime        = 118 minutes  
| country        = United States
| language       = English
| budget         = $35 million   
| gross          = $118 million 
| Prev =  
| Next =  
}} Captain Jean-Luc USS Enterprise-D Captain James T. Kirk to stop a villain from destroying a planet.

Parts of the film were shot at the Valley of Fire State Park near Overton, Nevada; Paramount Studios; and Lone Pine, California.

While the film received mixed reviews from critics, it performed well at the box office.

==Plot== USS Enterprise-B, John Harriman. During the voyage, Enterprise is pressed into a rescue mission to save two El-Aurian ships from a strange energy ribbon. Enterprise is able to save some of the refugees before their ships are destroyed, but the starship becomes trapped in the ribbon. Kirk goes to deflector control to alter the deflector dish, allowing Enterprise to escape, but the trailing end of the ribbon rakes across Enterprise s hull, exposing the section Kirk is in to space; he is presumed dead.

In 2371, Enterprise Captain  , who had stolen the trilithium from Romulans for Soran. Data is rescued just before the station is destroyed by the shock wave.
 Guinan (Whoopi Goldberg), Enterprise s bartender, tells Picard more about Soran; they were among the El-Aurians rescued by the Enterprise-B in 2293. Guinan explains that Soran is obsessed with reentering the "Nexus", an extradimensional realm which allows those who enter to experience their pasts over again, whenever and however they choose, to ultimate and unending ecstasy. Guinan has learned, over time, to accept no longer being in the Nexus, but warns that Soran, who wants to return to the Nexus desperately, is dangerous. Picard and Data determine that Soran, unable to fly a ship into the ribbon due to the uncertainty that the ship will survive long enough to ensure his success, is instead altering the path of the ribbon by destroying stars, and that he will attempt to re-enter the Nexus on Veridian III by destroying its sun—and, by extension, a heavily populated planet in the system.

Upon entering the Veridian system, Enterprise makes contact with the Duras Bird of Prey. Picard offers himself to the sisters in exchange for La Forge, but insists that he be transported to Sorans location first. La Forge is returned to Enterprise, but the VISOR he uses to see has been modified by Soran; La Forge inadvertently transmits Enterprise s shield frequency, allowing the Duras sisters to inflict crippling damage on Enterprise. Enterprise destroys the Bird of Prey, but sustains critical damage. Commander William Riker orders an evacuation to the saucer section of the ship and separates from the star drive, but the shock wave from the star drives destruction knocks the saucer out of control, and it crash-lands on Veridian III.

Picard fails to talk Soran out of his plan and is too late to stop him from launching his missile. The collapse of the Veridian star alters the course of the Nexus ribbon as predicted, and it sweeps Picard and Soran away while the shock wave from the star obliterates everything in the system, including Enterprise. In the Nexus, Picard finds himself surrounded by the "family he never had", including a wife and children, but he realizes it is an illusion. He is confronted by an "echo" of Guinan, After being told that he may leave whenever he chooses and go wherever and whenever he wishes, "Echo" Guinan sends him to meet Kirk, also safe in the Nexus. Though Kirk is at first reluctant to leave, Picard convinces Kirk to return to Picards present and stop Soran.

Leaving the Nexus, the two arrive on Veridian III minutes before Soran launches the missile. Kirk distracts Soran long enough for Picard to lock the missile in place, causing it to explode on the launchpad and kill Soran. Kirk is fatally injured by a fall during the encounter; as he dies, Picard assures him that he "made a difference." Picard buries Kirk before a shuttle arrives to transport him to the wreckage of the Enterprise saucer. Three starships enter orbit to retrieve the unsalvageable Enterprises survivors.

==Cast==
The entire main cast of   appears in Generations. Many of the cast members, no longer working a steady job on a television series, were wary of the so-called "Star Trek curse" preventing them from finding non-Trek roles in the future. Beeler, 26. 
* Patrick Stewart as Captain Jean-Luc Picard
* William Shatner as Captain James T. Kirk William T. Riker Data 
* LeVar Burton as Lieutenant Commander Geordi La Forge
*  , portraying his TNG characters grandfather, Colonel Worf, who defended Kirk and McCoy at their trial.
* Gates McFadden as Chief Medical Officer Commander Beverly Crusher
* Marina Sirtis as ships counselor Commander Deanna Troi John Harriman
* Malcolm McDowell as Tolian Soran
* Jacqueline Kim as Ensign Demora Sulu
* Barbara March and Gwynyth Walsh as the villainous Klingon sisters Lursa and BEtor
* Patti Yasutake as Enterprise nurse Lieutenant Alyssa Ogawa
*  

Many of the background players appeared in different roles throughout the run of the series.   as the Vulcan Tuvok. Nemecek-318. 

Initially, the entire principal cast of The Original Series was featured in the films first script, but ultimately only three members appeared in the film:  ". In that episode, Scotty implied that he believed Kirk to be still alive, although the scenes setting was after Scotty had witnessed Kirks apparent death in Star Trek: Generations. The official explanation for the inconsistency is that Scotty was disoriented in "Relics", as he had just re-materialized after 75 years transporter stasis. 

==Production==

===Development===
After the release of   in 1991, it was expected that the next Star Trek feature film would feature the cast of the   television spinoff series. Paramount Pictures executives approached The Next Generation producer Rick Berman in late 1992 about creating a feature film, four months before the official announcement. Nemecek, 308. 

Berman informed Ronald D. Moore and Brannon Braga that Paramount had approved a two-picture deal. Moore and Braga, who were convinced Berman had called them into his office to tell them The Next Generation was cancelled, instead found Berman asking them to write one of the Star Trek films.  Berman also worked with former Next Generation producer Maurice Hurley to develop possible story ideas.  Executive producer Michael Piller turned down the opportunity to develop ideas, objecting to what he saw as a "competition" for the job.  Ultimately Moore and Bragas script was chosen; the writers spent weeks with Berman developing the story before taking a working vacation in May 1993 to write the first-draft screenplay, completed June 1. Nemecek, 309. 

Berman felt that including the original cast of the previous Star Trek films felt like a "good way to pass the baton" to the next series.  In the initial draft of the screenplay, the original series cast appeared in a prologue, and Guinan served as the bridge between the two generations. The Enterprise-Ds end also appeared—the saucer crash had first been proposed as the cliffhanger for Moores original sixth-season finale "All Good Things...", which eventually became the series finale.  Kirks death initially developed in Braga, Moore and Bermans story sessions. Moore recalled that "we wanted to aim high, do something different and big... We knew we had to have a strong Picard story arc, so what are the profound things in a mans life he has to face? Mortality tops the list." After the idea of killing off a Next Generation cast member was vetoed, someone suggested that Kirk die instead. Moore recalled that "we all sorta looked around and said, That might be it. " The studio and Shatner himself had few concerns about the plot point. 

Refining the script also meant facing the realities of budget constraints. The initial proposal included location shooting in Hawaii, Idaho and the Midwestern United States and the total budget was over $30&nbsp;million. After negotiations, the budget was reduced to $25&nbsp;million.  A revised version of the script from March 1994 included feedback from the producers, studio, actors and director; the writers changed a sequence where Harriman trained his predecessors in the Enterprise-Bs operation after Shatner felt the scenes joke went too far. Picards personal tragedy was written as his brother Roberts heart attack, but Stewart suggested the loss of his entire family in a fire to add emotional impact. Nemecek, 310.  The draft scripts opening sequence took place on the solar observatory with two Rosencrantz and Guildenstern-influenced characters talking shortly before the Romulans attack; Next Generation writer Jeri Taylor suggested that the opening should be something "fun", leading to the switch to a holodeck promotion-at-sea. Nemecek, 311. 

Nimoy turned down the chance to direct the feature as well as reprise the role of Spock.  The producers chose   double-length pilot episode "Emissary (DS9 episode)|Emissary". 
 

Production on Generations began while The Next Generation was still filming. Scenes that did not feature The Next Generation regulars were filmed first. After the end of the show, there was only six months before the film was scheduled to be released in theaters. Nemecek, 307. 

===Design and costumes===
Generations s   and  . Zimmerman collaborated with illustrator  , Zimmerman noted that even in the future humanity will still need life support and have the same furniture needs, so a logical approach was to start with what would remain the same and work from there. Edgerly & Zimmerman, 52. 

Transitioning from a television screen to a movie meant that sets and designs needed to be more detailed, the colors more subtle, and the level of polish higher. Zimmerman felt obliged to improve on the sets fans had watched for seven seasons, especially the bridge.  Edgerly & Zimmerman, 53.  Zimmerman repainted the set, added computer consoles, raised the captains chair for a more commanding presence, and reworked the bridges ceiling struts; Zimmerman had always been unhappy with how the ceiling looked but had never had the time or money to rework it previously. Edgerly & Zimmerman, 53. 

The script called for an entirely new location on the Enterprise, stellar cartography. According to Zimmerman, the script characterized the location as a small room with maps on one wall. Finding the concept uninteresting, Zimmerman designed a circular set with three stories to give the impression the actors are inside a star map. Zimmermans previous work designing a crisis management center influenced the design, dominated by video screens. Edgerly & Zimmerman, 54. 

The Enterprise-B model was a modification of the Excelsior vessel first designed by effects house   a decade earlier. Production designer Herman Zimmerman designed the Enterprise-B with additions to its hull, some of which were added so that they could depict damage to the ship without harming the underlying models surface. Star Trek: The Next Generation Companion, Larry Nemecek, pg. 319  The surrounding spacedock was a modification of the model created for   (1979). 

While the feature film made use of new sets and props, Dwyer  reused previous Star Trek props or made new ones out of premade materials where possible rather than spend more money on entirely new items. A chair used to torture LaForge was created using a birthing chair, nosehair clippers and flashlights for accents. Packing pieces from electronics were used to form the shapes of set walls for the Bird of Prey bridge. Nemecek, 316.  The Amargosa stellar observatory set was filled with reused props from The Next Generation, with others added in deliberate nods to past episodes. Other setpieces were original; these included paintings of Picards ancestors and a cowboy for the locations in the Nexus. Nemecek, 317. 

  onwards. These included a fastening on the right side of the chest and a slightly more militaristic approach with rank bandings on the sleeves. The costumes for the female crew-members were different - instead of the additional fastening, there was a higher than previously seen black band around the waist. These designs were ultimately never used - instead a combination of the uniforms as seen on The Next Generation,   and the upcoming series,   were worn by the actors. However the news of the change in costumes came so late in production that the original re-designs were included on the range of licensed action figures by  " by Roxann Dawson as BElanna Torres. 

===Filming===
  stood in as a holodeck recreation of a sailing ship Enterprise.]]
  served as the alien planet Veridian III]]

Berman backed Carsons choice to hire John A. Alonzo, the director of photography for Chinatown and Scarface. 

Despite the budget cuts Generations shot many scenes on location.

The Enterprise-D promotion ceremony on the holodeck was filmed on the Lady Washington, a full-scale replica of the first American sailing ship to visit Japan. The Washington was anchored at Marina del Rey and sailed out a few miles from shore over five days of shooting. Some of the Washington s crew appeared amongst Enterprise crewmembers.  Las Vegas, Nevada. The rises height and sloped sides required cast and crew to climb 160 vertical feet using safety ropes and carry all provisions and equipment with them. The 110-degree heat was difficult for all involved, especially Shatner, as his character wore an all-wool uniform. Nemecek, 315. 

Picards house in the Nexus was a private home in Pasadena, California; almost all the furnishings were custom props or outside items. The house, barn and horse jump of Kirks Nexus recollections were filmed at William Shatners ranch.

After test screenings, it was decided to re-shoot Captain Kirks death. Originally, Kirk was shot and killed by Doctor Soran, but it was felt by the test audience that this was not a fitting death for such an iconic character. The re-shoot changed the manner of his death, so that instead, he sacrifices himself by leaping across a broken walkway to retrieve Sorans control pad and de-cloak the trilithium warhead. The original ending is shown in the deleted scenes of the Collectors Edition DVD.

===Effects===
Generation s special effects tasks were split between the television shows various effects vendors and ILM. Nemecek, 313. 

The previous Star Trek films used motion control techniques to record multiple passes of the starship models. For Generations, they began using computer-generated models for certain shots. Magid, 78.  No physical miniatures were ever built for the refugee ships, for instance, and the Enterprise-Bs encounter in the ribbon also solely used a computer-generated model. Other CGI elements included the Enterprise warp effect, the solar collapses, and the Veridian III planet. Nemecek, 319. 

While digital techniques were used for many sequences and ships, a few models were physically built, including the observatory, built by model shop foreman John Goodson, and the Enterprise-B, which used the existing Excelsior model with additions designed by Zimmerman. Nemecek, 320. 

Because Generations featured the Enterprise-D separating into saucer and engineering sections, the original   model built by ILM for the television series was hauled out of storage. The ship was stripped, rewired, and its surface detailed to stand up to scrutiny of the silver screen. A 12-foot saucer was constructed for the crash sequence, filmed in a 40-by-80&nbsp;ft forest floor set extended by matte paintings. ILM shot its crew members walking about their parking lot and matted the footage onto the top of the saucer to represent the Starfleet personnel evacuating the saucer section. 

===Music=== Dennis McCarthy, a composer who had worked on The Next Generation, was given the task of composing for the feature. Critic Jeff Bond wrote that while McCarthys score was "tasked with straddling the styles of both series", it also offered the opportunity for the composer to produce stronger dramatic writing. His opening music is a choral piece that plays while a floating champagne bottle tumbles through space. For the action scenes with the Enterprise-B, McCarthy used low brass chords; Kirk was given a brass motif accented by snare drums (a sound forbidden during The Next Generation), while the scene ends with dissonant notes as Scott and Chekov discover Kirk has been blown into space. Bond, 152. 

McCarthy expanded his brassy style for the films action sequences, such as the battle over Veridian III and the crash-landing of the Enterprise. For Picards trip to the Nexus, more choral music and synthesizers accompany Picards discovery of his family. The films only distinct theme, a broad fanfare, first plays when Picard and Kirk meet. The theme blends McCarthys theme for Picard from The Next Generation s first season, notes from the theme for  , and Alexander Courages classic Star Trek fanfare. 

For the final battle of Kirk and Picard against Soran, McCarthy used staccato music to accentuate the fistfight. For Kirks death, McCarthy mated lyrical strings with another statement of the Courage theme, while a shot of Picard standing over Kirks grave is scored with more pomp.  As the film closes, the Courage theme plays once more. Bond, 153. 

The soundtrack for the film was re-released as a two-disc, expanded collectors edition on  . Retrieved 2013-08-21. 
<!-- ==Themes==
Generations continues Star Trek s explorations of the concept of what it means to be human.    -->

==Reception==

===Release===
Generations went on general release in North America on November 18, 1994 and grossed $23.1 million during the opening weekend, averaging $8,694 across 2,659 theatres. It was the highest grossing film during the first week of its release in the United States, and stayed in the top ten for a further four weeks. The film went on to gross $75,671,125 in the U.S. and $42,400,000 outside the U.S. making a total of $118,071,125 worldwide against a $35&nbsp;million budget.  In Japan, the film grossed $1.2&nbsp;million its opening weekend, a large amount considering the franchises usual poor performance in that market. 

Generations s marketing included a web site, the first on the internet to officially publicize a motion picture. The site was a success, being viewed millions of times worldwide in the weeks leading to the films release at a time when fewer than a million Americans had internet access.  A novelization of the film written by J.M. Dillard spent three weeks on The New York Times Best Seller list|The New York Times Best Seller list.

Several tie-in video games were released to coincide with the films release. These included a PC game by developers   for the Game Boy and the Game Gear handheld devices. 

===Critical reaction===
Star Trek: Generations earned mixed reviews from critics.

  television series." 

  gave the film a score of 7 out of 10, saying that it "feels a little rushed and manufactured," but called it "one of the better of the odd-numbered Trek films,"  referring to a belief that even-numbered Star Trek films are traditionally of higher quality.

In a negative review, Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun-Times asserted that Generations was "undone by its narcissism" due to the films overemphasis on franchise in-jokes and the overuse of "polysyllabic pseudoscientific gobbledygook" uttered by its characters.  Ebert also lamented the films unimaginative script and complained "the starship can go boldly where no one has gone before, but the screenwriters can only do vice versa."   

==Notes==
 

==References==
 
*  
*  
* 
*  
*  
*  
*  
*  
* 
 

==External links==
 
*  
*  
*  

 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 