Star Trek II: The Wrath of Khan
 
 
 
{{Infobox film
| name           = Star Trek II: The Wrath of Khan
| image          = Star Trek II The Wrath of Khan.png
| image_size     = 220px
| border         = yes
| alt            = 
| caption        = Theatrical release poster art by Bob Peak
| director       = Nicholas Meyer
| producer       = {{Plainlist|
* Robert Sallin
* Harve Bennett  
}}
| screenplay     = {{Plainlist|
* Jack B. Sowards
* Uncredited:
* Nicholas Meyer
}}
| story          = {{Plainlist|
* Harve Bennett
* Jack B. Sowards
* Uncredited:
* Nicholas Meyer
* Samuel A. Peeples
}}
| based on       =   See cast
| music          = James Horner
| cinematography = Gayne Rescher
| editing        = William Paul Dornisch
| distributor    = Paramount Pictures
| released       =  
| runtime        = 112 minutes  
| country        = United States
| language       = English
| budget         = $11.2 million   
| gross          = $97 million   
}}
Star Trek II: The Wrath of Khan is a 1982 American   (1979). The plot features Admiral   episode "  and concludes with 1986s  .
 swashbuckling atmosphere of the original series, and the theme was reinforced by James Horners musical score. Nimoy had not intended to have a role in The Motion Picture s sequel, but was enticed back on the promise that his character would be given a dramatic death scene. Negative test audience reaction to Spocks death led to significant revisions of the ending over Meyers objections. The production used various cost reduction|cost-cutting techniques to keep within budget, including utilizing miniatures from past projects and re-using sets, effects footage and costumes from the previous movie. Among the films technical achievements is that it is the first feature film to contain a complete sequence created entirely with computer-generated graphics.

The Wrath of Khan was released in North America on June 4, 1982. It was a box office success, earning US$97&nbsp;million worldwide and setting a world record for first-day box office gross. Critical reaction to the film was positive; reviewers highlighted Khan, the films pacing, and the character interactions as strong elements. Negative reaction focused on weak special effects and some of the acting. The Wrath of Khan is considered by some to be the best film of the Star Trek series, and is credited with renewing substantial interest in the franchise.

==Plot== USS Enterprise Klingon Neutral Zone to reach the ship it is attacked by Klingon cruisers and critically damaged. The simulation is named the "Kobayashi Maru"—a no-win scenario designed to test the character of Starfleet officers. Later, Dr. McCoy joins Kirk on his birthday; seeing Kirk in low spirits, the doctor advises Kirk to get a new command and not grow old behind a desk.
 create habitable Clark Terrell beam down 15 years Carol Marcus, and their son, List of Star Trek characters (G–M)#M|David.   

The Enterprise embarks on a three-week training voyage. Kirk assumes command after the ship receives a distress call from Regula I. En route, the Enterprise is ambushed and crippled by the Reliant, leading to the deaths and injuries of many trainees. Khan hails the Enterprise and offers to spare Kirks crew if they relinquish all material related to Genesis. Kirk stalls for time and uses the Reliants prefix code to remotely lower its Shields (Star Trek)|shields, allowing the Enterprise to counter-attack. Khan is forced to retreat and effect repairs, while the Enterprise limps to Regula I. Kirk, McCoy, and Saavik beam to the station and find Terrell and Chekov alive, along with slaughtered members of Marcuss team. They soon find Carol and David hiding deep inside the planetoid of Regula. Khan, having used Terrell and Chekov as spies, orders them to kill Kirk; Terrell resists the eels influence and kills himself while Chekov collapses as the eel leaves his body. Khan then transports Genesis aboard the Reliant.  Though Khan believes his foe stranded on Regula I, Kirk and Spock use a coded message to arrange a rendezvous. Kirk directs the Enterprise into the nearby Mutara Nebula; static discharges inside the nebula render shields useless and compromise targeting systems, making the Enterprise and the Reliant evenly matched. Kirk exploits Khans inexperience in space combat and two-dimensional thinking to critically disable the Reliant.
 warp drive. mind meld, telling him to "remember". Spock successfully restores power to the warp drive and the Enterprise escapes the explosion, though at the cost of his life. The explosion of Genesis causes the gas in the nebula to reform into a new planet, capable of sustaining life.

After being alerted by McCoy, Kirk arrives in the engine room and discovers Spock dying of radiation poisoning. The two share a meaningful exchange in which Spock urges Kirk not to grieve, as his decision to sacrifice his own life to save those of the ships crew is a logical one, before succumbing to his injuries. A space burial is held in the Enterprise  s torpedo room and Spocks coffin is shot into orbit around the new planet. The crew leaves to pick up the Reliants marooned crew from Ceti Alpha V. Spocks coffin, having soft-landed, rests on the Genesis planets surface.   

==Cast==
 
William Shatner plays James T. Kirk, a Starfleet Admiral and former commanding officer of the Enterprise. Kirk and Khan never confront each other face-to-face during the film. All of their interactions are over a viewscreen or through communicators and their scenes were filmed four months apart    although a draft script had Khan defeating Kirk in a swordfight.  Meyer described Shatner as an actor who was naturally protective of his character and himself, and who performed better over multiple takes. 

Ricardo Montalbán portrays Khan Noonien Singh, a genetically enhanced superhuman who used his strength and intellect to briefly rule much of Earth in the 1990s. Montalbán said that he believed all good villains do villainous things, but think that they are acting for the "right" reasons; in this way, Khan uses his anger at the death of his wife to justify his pursuit of Kirk. The film was close to production approval when it occurred to the producers that no one had asked Montalbán whether he was interested in appearing in the film    despite his character having been in the scripts for more than a year. Montalbán was unsure whether he could plausibly play Khan again after many years, especially given his current role of Mr. Roarke on Fantasy Island.  Contrary to speculation that Montalbán used a prosthetic chest, no artificial devices were added to emphasize Montalbáns muscular physique,    since even in his 60s and despite an increasingly painful back injury, stemming from being thrown off a horse in the 1950s, Montalbán had a vigorous workout routine. Montalbán enjoyed making the film, and counted the role as a career highlight. His major complaint was that he was never face-to-face with Shatner for a scene. "I had to do my lines with the script girl, who, as you might imagine, sounded nothing like Bill  ," he explained. 

Captain Spock is portrayed by Leonard Nimoy. Nimoy had not intended to have a role in The Motion Picture s sequel, but was enticed back on the promise that his character would be given a dramatic death scene.    Nimoy felt it was logical that as Wrath of Khan would be the final Star Trek film, having Spock "go out in a blaze of glory" would be an appropriate way to end the character. 

DeForest Kelley plays Leonard McCoy, the Enterprise s chief medical officer and a close friend of Kirk and Spock. Kelley was dissatisfied with an earlier version of the script to the point that he considered not taking part.  Kelley noted his character spoke many of the films lighter lines, and felt that this role was essential in bringing a lighter side to the onscreen drama. 
 ABC aired The Wrath of Khan on television in 1985, and in the directors edition, making Scotts grief at the crewmans death more understandable.   
 Clark Terrell; Meyer had seen Winfields work in films such as Sounder (film)|Sounder and wanted to direct him. Meyer thought in retrospect that the Ceti eel scenes might have been corny, but felt that Winfields performance helped add gravity. 
 Carol Marcus, the lead scientist working on Project Genesis, and the mother of Kirks son, David (played by Merritt Butrick). Meyer was looking for an actress who looked beautiful enough that it was plausible a womanizer such as Kirk would fall for her, yet who could also project a sense of intelligence. Meyer liked that Butricks hair was blond like Beschs and curly like Shatners, making him a plausible son of the two. 

==Production==

===Development===
  was removed from a direct role in the development of The Wrath of Khan due to concerns that he was the main reason behind The Motion Picture s lukewarm reception.   ]]

After the release of The Motion Picture, executive producer Gene Roddenberry wrote his own sequel. In his plot, the crew of the Enterprise travel back in time to set right a corrupted time line after Klingons use the Guardian of Forever to prevent the assassination of John F. Kennedy.     This was rejected by Paramount executives, who blamed the poor performance and large budget ($46&nbsp;million) of the first movie on its plodding pace and the constant rewrites Roddenberry demanded.   As a consequence, Roddenberry was removed from the production and, according to Shatner, "kicked upstairs" to the ceremonial position of executive consultant.    Harve Bennett, a new Paramount television producer, was made producer for the next Star Trek film.   According to Bennett, he was called in front of a group including Jeffrey Katzenberg and Michael Eisner and asked if he thought he could make a better film than The Motion Picture, which Bennett confessed he found "really boring".    When Bennett replied in the affirmative, Charles Bluhdorn asked, "Can you make it for less than forty-five-fucking-million-dollars?" Bennett replied that "Where I come from, I can make five movies for that."   

Bennett realized he faced a serious challenge in developing the new Star Trek movie, partly due to his never having seen the television show.  To compensate, Bennett watched all the original episodes. This immersion convinced Bennett that what the first movie lacked was a real villain; after seeing the episode "Space Seed", he decided that the character of Khan Noonien Singh was the perfect enemy for the new film.    Before the script was settled upon, Bennett gathered his production staff. He selected Robert Sallin, a director of television commercials and a college friend, to produce the film. Sallins job would be to produce Star Trek II quickly and cheaply.    Bennett also hired Michael Minor as art director to shape the direction of the film. 
 Genesis Device". 
 villains on a typical TOS episode.  Deadlines loomed for special effects production to begin (which required detailed storyboards based on a completed script), and by this point there was no finished script to use. 

  Time After Time, could help resolve the screenplay issues.  Meyer had also never seen an episode of Star Trek.    He had the idea of making a list consisting of everything that the creative team had liked from the preceding drafts&mdash;"it could be a character, it could be a scene, it could be a plot, it could be a subplot,   it could be a line of dialogue"&mdash;so that he could use that list as the basis of a new screenplay made from all the best aspects of the previous ones.   To offset fan expectation that Spock would die, Meyer had the character "killed" in the Kobayashi Maru simulator in the opening scene.   The effects company required a completed script in just 12 days. Meyer wrote the screenplay uncredited and for no pay before the deadline, surprising the actors and producers,  and rapidly produced subsequent rewrites as necessary. One draft, for example, had a baby in Khans group, who is killed with the others in the Genesis detonation.  Meyer later said:

  }}

Meyer described his script as "  undertones, but was mostly ignored by the creative team. 

===Design===
Meyer attempted to change the look of Star Trek to match the nautical atmosphere he envisioned and stay within budget.  The Enterprise, for example, was given a   television show, such as bulkheads, railings, and sets, were cannibalized and reused.  A major concern for the designers was that the Reliant should be easily distinguishable from the Enterprise. The ships design was flipped after Bennett accidentally opened and approved the preliminary Reliant designs upside-down. 

 ]]
Designer  . The first versions of the uniforms had stiff black collars, but Sallin suggested changing it to a turtleneck, using a form of vertical quilting called Trapunto quilting|trapunto. The method creates a bas-relief effect to the material by stuffing the outlined areas with soft thread shot via air pressure through a hollow needle.   By the time of The Wrath of Khan s production, the machines and needles needed to produce trapunto were rare, and Fletcher was only able to find one needle for the wardrobe department.  The crew was so worried about losing or breaking the needle that one of the departments workers took it home with him as a security measure, leading Fletcher to think it had been stolen. 

For Khan and his followers, Fletcher created a strong contrast with the highly organized Starfleet uniforms; his idea was that the exiles costumes were made out of whatever they could find.  Fletcher said, "My intention with Khan was to express the fact that they had been marooned on that planet with no technical infrastructure, so they had to cannibalize from the spaceship whatever they used or wore. Therefore, I tried to make it look as if they had dressed themselves out of pieces of upholstery and electrical equipment that composed the ship."  Khans costume was designed with an open chest to show Ricardo Montalbáns physique. Fletcher also designed smocks for the Regula I scientists, and civilian clothes for Kirk and McCoy that were designed to look practical and comfortable. 

Meyer had a "No Smoking" sign added to the Enterprise s bridge, which he recalled "Everyone had a fit over   I said Why have they stopped smoking in the future? Theyve been smoking for four hundred years, you think its going to stop in the next two?"  The sign appeared in the first shot of the film, but was removed for all others appearing in the final cut of the film. 

===Filming===
Principal photography began on November 9, 1981, and ended on January 29, 1982.   The Wrath of Khan was more action-oriented than its predecessor, but less costly to make. The project was supervised by Paramounts television unit rather than its theatrical division.   Bennett, a respected television veteran, made The Wrath of Khan on a budget of $11&nbsp;million—far less than The Motion Picture s $46&nbsp;million.  The budget was initially lower at $8.5 million, but it rose when the producers were impressed by the first two weeks of footage.  Meyer used camera and set tricks to spare the construction of large and expensive sets. For a scene taking place at Starfleet Academy, a forced perspective was created by placing scenery close to the camera to give the sense the set was larger than it really was. To present the illusion that the Enterprise s elevators moved between decks, corridor pieces were wheeled out of sight to change the hall configuration while the lift doors were closed.  Background equipment such as computer terminals were rented when possible instead of purchased outright. Some designed props, such as a redesigned phaser and communicator, were vetoed by Paramount executives in favor of existing materials from The Motion Picture. 

The Enterprise was refurbished for its space shots, with its shiny exterior dulled down and extra detail added to the frame.  Compared to the newly built Reliant, the Enterprise was hated by the effects artists and cameramen; it took eight people to mount the model, and a forklift truck to move it.   The Reliant, meanwhile, was lighter and had less complex internal wiring. The ships were filmed on a blue screen with special film that does not register the color; the resulting shots could be added to effects shots or other footage. Any reflection of blue on the ships hull would appear as a hole on the film; the gaps had to be patched frame by frame for the final film. The same camera used to film Star Wars, the Dykstraflex, was used for shots of the Enterprise and other ships. 

The barren desert surface of Ceti Alpha V was simulated on stage 8, the largest sound stage at Paramounts studio. The set was elevated 25 feet off the ground and covered in wooden mats, over which tons of colored sand and powder were dumped. A cyclorama was painted and wrapped around the set, while massive industrial fans created a sandstorm. The filming was uncomfortable for actors and crew alike. The spandex environmental suits Koenig and Winfield wore were unventilated, and the actors had to signal by microphone when they needed air. Filming equipment was wrapped in plastic to prevent mechanical troubles and everyone on set wore boots, masks, and coveralls as protection from flying sand. 

Spocks death was shot over three days, during which no visitors were allowed on set.  Spocks death was to be irrevocable, but Nimoy had such a positive experience during filming that he asked if he could add a way for Spock to return in a later film. The mind meld sequence was initially filmed without Kelleys prior knowledge of what was going on.   Shatner disagreed with having a clear glass separation between Spock and Kirk during the death scene; he instead wanted a translucent divider allowing viewers to only see Spocks silhouette, but his objection was overruled. During Spocks funeral sequence Meyer wanted the camera to track the torpedo that served as Spocks coffin as it was placed in a long trough and slid into the launcher. The camera crew thought the entire set would have to be rebuilt to accommodate the shot, but Sallin suggested putting a dolly into the trough and controlling it from above with an offset arm.  Scotts rendition of "Amazing Grace" on the bagpipes was James Doohans idea.    Kathleen Nicholson Graham recorded the bagpipes music at Paramount Studio with the orchestra.  

Spocks death in the film was widely reported during production. " , using smoke machines to add a primal atmosphere. The shoot lasted from midday to evening, as the team was well aware there would be no time for reshoots.   
 65mm or VistaVision formats to compensate. When the larger prints were reduced through an anamorphic lens on the printer, the result was a Panavision composite.   

===Effects=== bluescreen during shooting, the VistaVision camera was panned and tracked to give the illusion of movement.  Damage to the Enterprise was cosmetic, and simulated with pieces of aluminum that were colored or peeled off. Phaser damage was created using stop motion. The script called for large-scale damage to the Reliant, so larger versions of the ships model were created to be blown up. 

  colored gels. Additional light effects such as auroras were created by the ILM animation department.  Using matte work, the ships were physically stuck on a background plate to complete the shot.  The destruction of the Reliant s engine nacelle was created by superimposing shots of the engine blowing apart and explosions over the model. 

The scene in which Terrell kills Jedda, a Regula scientist, by vaporizing him with a phaser was filmed in two takes. Winfield and the related actors first played out the scene; this footage became the background plate. A blue screen was wheeled onto the set and actor John Vargas, the recipient of the phaser blast, acted out his response to being hit with the energy weapon. A phaser beam element was placed on top of the background plate, and Vargas shots were optically dissolved into an airbrushed disintegration effect which matched Vargas position in every frame. 

The Ceti eel shots used several models, overseen by visual effects supervisor  . He tied a string to the eels to inch the models across the actors faces before they entered the ear canal.  The scene of a more mature eels leaving Chekovs ear was simulated by threading a microfilament through the floor of the set up to Koenigs ear. The scene was filmed with three variations, which Ralston described as "a dry shot, one with some blood, and the Fangoria shot, with a lot of gore."   Footage of a giant model of Koenigs ear was discarded from the theatrical release due to the visceral reaction it elicited in test audiences. 

Additional optical effects were provided by Visual Concept Engineering (VCE), a small effects company headed by Peter Kuran; Kuran had previously worked at ILM and left after finishing  .   VCE provided effects including phaser beams, the Enterprise reactor, additional sand on Ceti Alpha V, and an updated transporter effect. Meyer and the production staff were adamant about not using freeze frames for the transporter, as had been done in the original television series. Scenes were shot so that conversations would continue while characters were in mid-transport,  although much of the matte work VCE created was discarded when the production decided not to have as much action during transports. 

The Wrath of Khan was one of the first films to extensively use electronic images and computer graphics to speed production of shots. Computer graphics company   group, Veilleux offered them the task. The graphics team paid attention to detail for the sixty-second sequence; one artist ensured that the stars visible in the background matched those visible from a real star light-years from Earth. The animators hoped it would serve as a "commercial" for the studios talents. The studio would later branch off from Lucasfilm to form Pixar. 

===Music===
Jerry Goldsmith had composed the music for The Motion Picture, but was not an option for The Wrath of Khan given the reduced budget; Meyers composer for Time After Time, Miklós Rózsa, was likewise prohibitively expensive.  Bennett and Meyer wanted the music for the film to go in a different direction, but had not decided on a composer by the time filming began. Meyer initially hoped to hire an associate named John Morgan, but Morgan lacked film experience, which would have troubled the studio.  
 

Paramounts vice-president of music Joel Sill took a liking to a 28-year-old composer named James Horner, feeling that his demo tapes stood out from generic film music.  
  Horner was introduced to Bennett, Meyer and Salin.   Horner said that "  did not want the kind of score they had gotten before. They did not want a John Williams score, per se. They wanted something different, more modern."    When asked about how he landed the assignment, the composer replied that "the producers loved my work for Wolfen (film)|Wolfen, and had heard my music for several other projects, and I think, so far as Ive been told, they liked my versatility very much. I wanted the assignment, and I met with them, we all got along well, they were impressed with my music, and thats how it happened."    Horner agreed with the producers expectations and agreed to begin work in mid-January 1982. 

In keeping with the nautical tone, Meyer wanted music evocative of seafaring and swashbuckling, and the director and composer worked together closely, becoming friends in the process.  As a classical music fan, Meyer was able to describe the effects and sounds he wanted in the music.  While Horners style was described as "echoing both the bombastic and elegiac elements of John Williams Star Wars and Jerry Goldsmiths original Star Trek (The Motion Picture) scores,"    Horner was expressly told to not use any of Goldsmiths score. Instead Horner adapted the opening fanfare of Alexander Courages Star Trek television theme. "The fanfare draws you in immediately — you know youre going to get a good movie," Horner said.  
 

In comparison to the flowing main theme, Khans leitmotif was designed as a percussive texture that could be overlaid with other music and emphasized the characters insanity.  The seven-note brass theme was echoplexed to emphasize the characters ruminations about the past while on Ceti Alpha V, but does not play fully until Reliant s attack on the Enterprise. Many elements drew from Horners previous work (a rhythm that accompanies Khans theme during the surprise attack borrows from an attack theme from Wolfen, in turn influenced by Goldsmiths score for Alien (film)|Alien). Musical moments from the original television series are also heard during investigation of the Regula space station and elsewhere. 

To Horner, the "stuff underneath" the main story was what needed to be addressed by the score; in The Wrath of Khan, this was the relationship between Kirk and Spock. The main theme serves as Kirks theme, with a mellower section following that is the theme for the Starship Enterprise.  
  Horner also wrote a motif for Spock, to emphasize the characters depth: "By putting a theme over Spock, it warms him and he becomes three-dimensional rather than a collection of schticks."   The difference in the short, French horn-based cues for the villain and longer melodies for the heroes helped to differentiate characters and ships during the battle sequences. 

The soundtrack was Horners first major film score,  and was written in four and a half weeks. The resulting 72 minutes of music was then performed by a 91-piece orchestra.  Recording sessions took place April 12–15 at the Warner Bros. lot, The Burbank Studios.  A pickup session was held on April 30 to record music for the Mutara nebula battle, while another session held on May 3 was used to cover the recently changed epilogue.   The Thing were eschewing the synthesizer in favor of more traditional orchestras.   Craig Huxley performed his invented instrument—the Blaster Beam—during recording, as well as composing and performing electronic music for the Genesis Project video.  
  While most of the film was "locked in" by the time Horner had begun composing music, he had to change musical cue orchestration after the integration of special effects caused changes in scene durations. 

==Themes==
The Wrath of Khan features several recurring themes, including death, resurrection, and growing old.  Upon writing his script, Meyer hit upon a link between Spocks death and the age of the characters. "This was going to be a story in which Spock died, so it was going to be a story about death, and it was only a short hop, skip, and a jump to realize that it was going to be about old age and friendship," Meyer said. "I dont think that any of   scripts were about old age, friendship, and death."  In keeping with the theme of death and rebirth symbolized by Spocks sacrifice and the Genesis Device, Meyer wanted to call the film The Undiscovered Country, in reference to Prince Hamlets description of death in William Shakespeares Hamlet,  but the title was changed during editing without his knowledge.  Meyer disliked Wrath of Khan, but it was chosen because the preferred Vengeance of Khan conflicted with Lucasfilms forthcoming Revenge of the Jedi (renamed Return of the Jedi late in production).   

 
The Wrath of Khan follows in a long tradition of films in which the adventurer or explorer must undergo a figurative or literal death to start anew.  Spock is Kirks doppelgänger and together they represent a bifurcated hero, with the two characters representing dueling halves of the human condition. Spock represents the supernatural ideal of a completely logical and infallible person, while Kirk represents the impassioned and human reality, prone to error and at odds with himself.  Spocks sacrifice at the end of the film allows for Kirks spiritual rebirth in the tradition of the death-rebirth cycle. After commenting earlier that he feels old and worn out, Kirk states in the final scene that "I feel young."   The Kobayashi Maru test forces its participants to confront an unwinnable situation which serves as a test of character, but Kirk reveals that he won the test by cheating; Saavik responds that Kirk has never faced death. Spocks own solution to the no-win scenario, that of self-sacrifice,  forces Kirk to confront death after continually cheating it, and to grow as a character.   Sight and sound reinforce the themes of death and aging, as well as the promise of rebirth; Spock is the first character seen and his voice is the last heard, and his coffin follows the same trajectory towards the new planet as the Genesis Device does in a video lecture earlier in the film.  The principle of sacrificing the needs of the one for those of the many was translated to modern triage via the Spock principle.   

Meyer added elements to reinforce the aging of the characters. Kirks unhappiness about his birthday is compounded by McCoys gift of reading glasses. The script stated that Kirk was 49, but Shatner was unsure about being specific about Kirks age.  Bennett remembers that Shatner was hesitant about portraying a middle-aged version of himself, and believed that with proper makeup he could continue playing a younger Kirk. Bennett convinced Shatner that he could age gracefully like Spencer Tracy; the producer did not know that Shatner had worked with Tracy on Judgment at Nuremberg (1961), and was fond of the actor.  Meyer made sure to emphasize Kirks parallel to Sherlock Holmes in that both characters waste away in the absence of their stimuli; new cases, in Holmes case, and starship adventures in Kirks. 

Khans pursuit of Kirk is central to the films theme of vengeance, and The Wrath of Khan deliberately borrows heavily from   as well as the titular white whale of Melvilles novel; Khans blind pursuit of Kirk mirrors  .    Moby Dick s themes of vengeance would later heavily influence  . 

==Reception==

===Release===
The Wrath of Khan opened on June 4, 1982 in 1,621 theaters in the United States. It made $14,347,221 in its opening weekend, at the time the largest opening weekend gross in history.  It went on to earn $78,912,963 in the US,  becoming the sixth highest-grossing film of 1982.  It made $97,000,000 worldwide. Although the total gross of The Wrath of Khan was less than that of The Motion Picture, it was more profitable due to its lower production cost.  The films novelization, written by Vonda N. McIntyre, stayed on the The New York Times Best Seller list|New York Times paperback bestsellers list for more than three weeks.  Unlike the previous film, Wrath of Khan was not promoted with a toy line, although Playmates Toys created Khan and Saavik figures in the 1990s, and in 2007 Art Asylum crafted a full series of action figures to mark the films 25th anniversary.  In 2009 IDW Publishing released a comic adaptation of the film,  and Film Score Monthly released an expanded score. 

===Critical response===
Critical response was positive.  Review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes reports that 91% of selected critics have given the film a positive review based on a sample of 44.    After the lukewarm reaction to the first film, fan response to The Wrath of Khan was highly positive. The films success was credited with renewing interest in the franchise.    Mark Bernardin of Entertainment Weekly went further, calling The Wrath of Khan "the film that, by most accounts, saved Star Trek as we know it";    it is now considered one of the best films in the series.    

The films pacing was praised by reviewers in The New York Times and The Washington Post as being much swifter than its predecessor and closer to that of the television series.       Janet Maslin of The New York Times credited the film with a stronger story than The Motion Picture and stated the sequel was everything the first film should have been.  Variety (magazine)|Variety agreed that The Wrath of Khan was closer to the original spirit of Star Trek than its predecessor.    Strong character interaction was cited as a strong feature of the film,    as was Montalbáns portrayal of Khan.   
 Time Out complained about what were seen as tepid battle sequences,  and perceived melodrama.     While Ebert and TV Guide felt that Spocks death was dramatic and well-handled,     The Washington Post s Gary Arnold stated Spocks death "feels like an unnecessary twist, and the filmmakers are obviously well-prepared to fudge in case the public demands another sequel."  Negative reviews of the film also focused on the acting,     and Empire (magazine)|Empire singled out the "dodgy coiffures" and "Santa Claus tunics" as elements of the film that had not aged well. 
 Star Trek.   

American Film Institute recognition:
* AFIs 100 Years...100 Thrills - Nominated 
* AFIs 100 Years... 100 Heroes and Villains:
** Khan Noonien Singh - Nominated Villain 
* AFIs 10 Top 10 - Nominated Science Fiction Film 

==Home media== Beta in 1983. The studio sold the VHS for $39.95, $40 below contemporary movie cassette prices. It needed to sell 60,000 tapes to make the film as profitable as other tapes, but sold 120,000. The successful experiment was credited with instigating more competitive VHS pricing, an increase in the adoption of increasingly cheaper VHS players, and an industry-wide move away from rentals to sales as the bulk of videotape revenue.      
 Dolby surround director commentary, cast interviews, storyboards and the theatrical trailer.    The expanded cut of the film was given a Hollywood premiere before the release of the DVD. Meyer stated that he didnt believe directors cuts of films were necessarily better than the original but that the re-release gave him a chance to add elements that had been removed from the theatrical release by Paramount.  The four hours of bonus content and expanded directors cut were favorably received.    

The films original theatrical cut was released on     showrunner Manny Coto. 

==See also==
* List of films featuring space stations

== References ==
 

==External links==
 
 
*  
*  
*  


 
 
 
 
 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 