Bride of the Monster
{{Infobox film
| name = Bride of the Monster
| image = Bride of the Monster (1956 movie poster).jpg
| caption = Original theatrical poster
| director = Ed Wood
| producer = Ed Wood Alex Gordon Ed Wood
| narrator = Loretta King Tor Johnson
| music = Frank Worth William C. Thompson
| editing = Warren Adams
  | studio              = Rolling M. Productions
| distributor = Banner Pictures
| released =  
| runtime = 68 minutes
| country = United States
| language = English
| budget =   $70,000 (estimated)
}} Loretta King. It was produced, directed and co-written by Edward D. Wood, Jr.. Bride of the monster is considered to be Ed Woods biggest budgeted film. Shooting started in 1953 but due to further financial problems the film wasnt finished until 1955.

A sequel, entitled Night of the Ghouls, was finished in 1959, but due to last-minute financial problems, was not released until 1987. 
{{cite web
 | url = http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0156843/trivia
 | title = Night of the Ghouls – Trivia
 | work = Internet Movie Database
 | accessdate = 2007-04-17
}}
 

==Plot== abandoned and Haunted house|haunted. Craig (2009), p. 83–103  When they reach Willows House, they find it to be occupied and the current owner repeatedly denies them hospitality. One of the hunters attempts to use his rifle to force his entry into the house, but at this point a menacing giant (played by Tor Johnson) appears and scares the intruders away. 
 human subject experiment. Vornoff helpfully explains that the experiment will either give the captive the strength of twenty men, or kill him. Which is what happened to Vornoffs previous test subjects. The man dies on the operating table and the scientist is left visibly disheartened. His experiment has failed. 

The next scene opens to newspaper headlines, announcing that "the monster" has claimed two more victims. In a police station, officer Kelton (Paul Marco) asks to work the case of the monster of Lake Marsh. His superior Tom Robbins (Harvey B. Dunn), captain of the homicide department, turns him down and instead asks to see lieutenant Dick Craig (Tony McCoy, producer Donald E. McCoys son). The conversation between Robbins and Craig establishes that there are now 12 missing victims, and the police still has yet to determine what happened to them.  The reporter behind the newspaper reports is Janet Lawton (Loretta King Hadler, in a role originally intended for Dolores Fuller)  who happens to be Craigs Engagement|fiancée. Soon enough, Janet forces her way into the office and joins the conversation. Robbins and Janet verbally spar concerning the scarce and inconclusive evidence of the case, and whether it is rational to claim that monsters exist in the 20th century. Janet states that she is going to Lake Marsh to personally investigate the place and leaves the station, though Craig ineffectually protests against her idea. 

The camera follows Janet to the offices of the newspaper where she works. She visits the archives of the newspaper, asking the librarian Tillie (Ann Wilner) permission to research previous news items concerning Willows House. Then she leaves the offices, presumably to start her investigation.  At the police station, Robbins and Craig have a meeting with an intellectual from Europe, Professor Vladimir Strowski (George Becwar). He claims that there are significant similarities between the case of the Monster of Lake Marsh and that of the Loch Ness Monster. He seemingly agrees to assist the police in investigating the Marsh, but not at night, which somewhat puzzles Robbins.  As night falls and another storm starts begins, recalling the introduction and its comments on the weather, Janet drives alone to Lake Marsh. Due to poor visibility, Janet drives her car off the road and into a ravine. She leaves the car, and is immediately threatened by a large snake. As she passes out from fear, Lobo wrestles with the snake to rescue her.  In a brief scene alluding to Sexual fetishism|fetishism, Lobo caresses and smells the beret of Janet, made of Angora wool. Then places it in his pocket, evidently finding further use for it. 

Janet wakes up to find herself a prisoner of Vornoff, who uses hypnosis to put her back to sleep. The following day, Craig and his partner drive to the area around Lake Marsh. The scene reveals that the area is a swamp, where snakes, alligators, and quicksand are constant dangers to visitors. The partners also discuss the strange weather, and mention that the newspapers could be right about History of nuclear weapons|"the atom bomb explosions distorting the atmosphere". Craig (2009), p. 83-103  Another bit of dialogue points that Strowski left on his own, missing his scheduled appointment with the police. This introduces the notion that Strowski has his own hidden agenda.  The duo eventually discovers Janets abandoned car and realize she is the 13th missing victim. Though supposedly worried about her safety, they leave the swamp to rush to "a coffee joint about ten miles back" (10 miles = 16.09 kilometers). Meanwhile, Strowski drives a rented car to the swamp. Through the phone of the coffeehouse, Craig and his partner alert Robbins about Janets disappearance. The Captain starts researching her movements and contacts prior to the disappearance. 

The scene shifts to Willows House. Janet wakes up and takes in her strange surroundings. Vornoff and Lobo are there to greet her and offer tea. Vornoff assures her that Lobo is harmless, but the giant seems fascinated with her and approaches the female captive with questionable intent. Vornoff resorts to belting his assistant to drive him away, revealing to Janet the violent and despotic nature of her host. Then a conversation begins between the captor and the captive. Janet already knows, through searching in old records, that Vornoff purchased his residence in 1948. She attempts to reveal her identity as a reporter but he already knows, having searched her purse and found her press pass. He offers a brief background explanation for Lobo, mentioning that the giant is just human and that Vornoff found him in the "wilderness of Tibet". Vornoff abruptly ends the conversation by hypnotically placing Janet back to sleep. He orders Lobo to transport the captive to Votnoffs private quarters. 
 madman and exiled by his country, permanently parted from his wife and son. He has experienced years of being hunted, despised, and living like an animal.  Vornoff re-explains that his life goal is to create supersoldiers capable of conquering the world, and Strowski enthusiastically embraces the concept of creating a master race. But then a fundamental difference in their goals emerges. Strowski has dreams of conquest in the name of their country, while Vornoff dreams of his creations conquering in his own name. He has no loyalty to the country which exiled him.  Realizing this, Strowski pulls a gun on his old colleague. At this point Lobo arrives to defend his master. The confrontation ends with Vornoff feeding his would-be ally to his octopus. 

By late evening, Craig and his partner return to the swamp and discover Strowskis abandoned car. The partners part ways in their search of the area, with Craig heading towards Willows House. There is a scene where he sinks in quicksand and is threatened by an alligator, but he manages to save himself. Back in the secret laboratory, Vornoff uses a wave of his hand to summon Janet to his current location. She arrives dressed as a bride, summoned through telepathy. He has decided to use her as the next subject of his experiments. Lobo is reluctant to take part in this experiment, and Vornoff uses a whip to re-assert his control over his slave and assistant. Meanwhile, Craig has entered the house and accidentally discovers the secret passage. He is himself captured by Vornoff and Lobo. 

As the experiment is about to begin, the camera shifts to Lobo, who is visibly distressed. In an effective mute scene, the viewer is introduced to the inner struggle of the mute giant. He is torn between his loyalty to Vornoff and his infatuation with Janet. Taking his decision, the slave rebels and attacks his master. Vornoff pulls a gun at his servant, but his bullets seem to have no effect. Lobo knocks him out, releases Janet, and transports the unconscious Vornoff to the operating table. The scientist becomes the subject of his own human experiment.  Janet releases Craig, who briefly and ineffectually attempts to stop Lobo. Craig is once again defeated and knocked out. 
 tampered in Gods domain". 

==Production and release== Alex Gordon titled The Atomic Monster, but a lack of financing prevented any production.  Later Ed Wood revived the project as The Monster of the Marshes. Actual shooting began in October 1954 at the Ted Allan Studios, but further money problems quickly halted the production.  The required funds were supplied by a rancher named Donald McCoy, who became the films producer. He also provided his son to star as the films hero.  According to screenwriter Dennis Rodriguez, casting the younger McCoy as a protagonist was one of two terms Donald imposed on Wood. The other term was to include an atomic explosion in the finale. Craig (2009), p. 293-294  Production resumed in 1955 at Centaur Studios. Rhodes (2006), p. 142-143 
 Paramount theater in May 1955, under the title Bride of the Atom. 
   The film was reportedly completed and released through a deal with Samuel Z. Arkoff. Arkoff profited from the film more than Wood, and his earnings contributed to the funding of American International Pictures.  The end credits identify the copyright holder of the film as "Filmakers Releasing Organization".  Reid (2007), p. 26–27  Distribution rights were held by Banner Films in the United States, and by Exclusive in the United Kingdom. Reid (2007), p. 26-27 

==Analysis==

===Genre and background===
 Old Europe" United States. vilified and demonized Other for American audiences.  The country of origin for Vornoff and Strowski is left unnamed. The only clues is that it is European and has its own dreams of conquest. By implication, the country which exiled Vornoff in the 1930s could be Nazi Germany or the Soviet Union. Their role as villains for the American cinema had already been solidified by the 1950s, and Wood could be alluding to both of them. Strowski user the term master race, which is a key concept in Nazism. 
 The World, On the The Manchurian Candidate (1962), Dr. Strangelove (1964), Seven Days in May (1964), and Fail Safe (1964 film)|Fail-Safe (1964). 

===Content===

This was   and Red Reagan.   Parker was also the body-double of Lugosi in Frankenstein Meets the Wolf Man (1943).  Lugosis fee for the film is estimated at 1000 dollars. 

The opening credits feature the exterior of a house, introducing the location where much of the plot will supposedly take place. It is uncertain whether this opening scene features a real location or a theatrical scenery of some sort. Various theories exist, suggesting that the scene features the shot of a matte painting, a rear projection effect, or a miniature effect.  Scott Zimmerman, an acquaintance of Wood interviewed by Rudolph Grey, claimed that Wood himself had explained to him the secret of the scene. According to this version of the story, it was a normal two-floored house located in a crowded neighborhood of Los Angeles. For the purposes of the scene, Wood reportedly had a canvas tarpaulin erected behind the house to mask the presence of other buildings in the background. The painted canvas created the illusion that the house itself was part of a painting.  Rob Craig questions whether Wood would actually spend part of his small budget to erect an extensive tarpaulin. 
 Transylvania 6-5000), Jail Bait (1954).  

The film uses both stock footage of a real octopus and a fake, rubber octopus in scenes where "the monster" interacts with actors. It is widely believed this is a prop from the film Wake of the Red Witch (1948). Contradictory accounts claim that Wood either stole or rented the prop from Republic Pictures, which produced the earlier film.    The struggle between Vornoff and the octopus was filmed at Griffith Park. 
 Loretta King bribed Wood into casting her as Janet, with promises of securing further funding for the film. Fuller was so reduced to a cameo role.  King vehemently denies bribing Wood, so the story lacks confirmation. 

In a subplot of the film, there are storms every night for three months and strange weather patterns. The characters attribute the phenomenon to the effects the nuclear explosions have on the atmosphere. This probably reflects actual anxiety of the 1950s about potential climate change. Until the Partial Nuclear Test Ban Treaty (1963), Atmospheric nuclear weapons testing was used widely and recklessly.  Rob Craig suggests that the months of constant storms could be inspired by the Genesis flood narrative.  In the context of the film, the strange weather is implied to be a side-effect of the experiments of Vornoff which apparently release radioactivity to the atmosphere. 
 sadomasochistic in nature. 

Throughout the film, the mute Lobo is implied to have an unspecified intellectual disability and to be of sub-human intelligence. Yet he successfully operates complex machinery as if trained to do so. Craig views this scene as implying that supposedly "dumb" servants, can have a capacity of learning the secrets of their masters . 

The final scenes, with the mushroom cloud of the nuclear explosion, use stock footage from the blast of a thermonuclear weapon ("hydrogen bomb"). 

===Film series===

The apparent fetish of Lobo with angora wool is a reflection of Woods own fetish for the material. This also serves as the films connection to Glen or Glenda (1953), where the fetish plays a more prominent role. Hayes (2006), p. 137 

The character of Lobo also appeared again in Woods Night of the Ghouls. This film served as a sequel of sorts to Bride. Vornoff is absent from the later film, but there are references to the activities of "the mad doctor".
     Tor Johnson also plays a character called Lobo in The Unearthly (1957) by Boris Petroff. This character also serves the main villain. Craig (2013), p. 135–137 

This film is part of what Wood aficionados refer to as "The Kelton Trilogy", a trio of films featuring Paul Marco as "Officer Kelton", a whining, reluctant policeman. The other two films are Plan 9 from Outer Space and Night of the Ghouls. Kelton is the only character to appear in all three films.   

==Legacy==
In 1986, the film was featured in the syndicated series, the Canned Film Festival and was later featured on the comedy series, Mystery Science Theater 3000.
 colorized version was released by Legend Films.  This version is also available from Amazon Video on Demand. 

In 2010, a retrospective on the movie entitled Citizen Wood: Making ‘The Bride,’ Unmaking the Legend was included in the Mystery Science Theater 3000 Volume 19 DVD set.    Horror host Mr. Lobo is among the interviewees of the 27 minute documentary. 

==Controversies==
In 1980, the book The Golden Turkey Awards claims that Lugosis character declares his manservant Lobo (Tor Johnson) "as harmless as kitchen"  . This allegedly misspoken line is cited as evidence of either Lugosis failing health/mental faculties, or as further evidence of Woods incompetence as a director.    However, a viewing of the film itself reveals that Lugosi said this line correctly, the exact words being, "Dont be afraid of Lobo; hes as gentle as a kitten." The easier explanation would be that authors Michael Medved and Harry Medved saw the film in a theater setting with inferior sound quality. A single viewing in such conditions could result in mishearing some lines of dialogue. Unfortunately the inaccurate claim managed to achieve urban legend status, and it keeps circulating.  
 Ed Wood, Republic Studios backlot, while failing to steal the motor which enabled the prop to move realistically, although, by the directors admission, the film preferred narrative interest over historical accuracy. These events are also alleged in the 2004 documentary, The 50 Worst Movies Ever Made. However, other stories circulated insist Wood legitimately rented the octopus, along with some cars.  To remedy the lack of movement from the octopus prop, whenever someone was killed by the monster in the film, they simply flailed around in the shallow water while holding the tentacles to imitate movement. The filming of these scenes, as well as the production of the film in general, were played to comic effect in Ed Wood.

Rudolph Greys book Nightmare of Ecstasy: The Life and Art of Edward D. Wood Jr. contains anecdotes regarding the making of this film. 
  
Grey notes that participants in the original events sometimes contradict one another, but he relates each persons information for posterity. He also includes Ed Woods claim that one of his films made a profit and surmises that it was most likely Bride of the Monster, but that Wood had oversold the film and could not reimburse the backers.

==See also==
*Edward D. Wood, Jr. filmography

==References==
*  
*  
*  
* Rudolph Grey, Nightmare of Ecstasy: The Life and Art of Edward D. Wood, Jr. (1992) ISBN 978-0-922915-24-8
*  
*  
*  
*  
* The Haunted World of Edward D. Wood, Jr. (1996), documentary film directed by Brett Thompson
 

==External links==
*  
*  

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 